First'  arrival  of  the  English  at  this  islaad.— -Origin,  pro¬ 
gress,  and  termination  of  the  proprietary  government. 
Revenue  granted  to  the  crown  of  four  and  a  half  per 
centum  on  all  produce  exported — how  obtained.— Origin 
of  the  act  of  navigation. — Situation  and  extent  of  the 
island. — Soil  and  produce. — Population. — Decline,  and 
causes  thereof. — Exports  and  imports. 

THE  island  of  Barbadoes*  of  which  I  now  pro¬ 
pose  to  treat,  was  probably  first  discovered  by 
the  Portuguese  in  their  voyages  from  Brasil;  and 
from  them  it  received  the  name  which  it  still  retains.* 

*  It  is  said  not  to  have  been  noticed  in  any  sea-chart  before  the 
year  1600. 

Vol.  IL 


B 


i6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

It  was  found  without  occupants  or  claimants.  The 
Charaibes,  for  reasons  altogether  unknown  to  us, 
had  deserted  it,  and  the  Portuguese,  satisfied  with 
the  splendid  regions  they  had  acquired  on  the  con¬ 
tinent,  seem  to  have  considered  if  as  of  little  value. 
Having  furnished  it  with  a  breed  of  swine  for  the 
benefit  of  such  of  their  countrymen  as  might  navi¬ 
gate  the  same  track,  they  left  the  island  in  all  other 
respects  as  they  found  it. 

Of  the  English  the  first  who  are  known  to  have' 
landed  in  this  island,  were  the  crew  of  a  ship  called 
the  Olive  Blossom ,  bound  from  London  to  Surinam,, 
in  1605,  and  fitted  out  at  the  expense  of  Sir  Olive 
Leigh,  whom  Purchas  styles-  *  a  worshipful  knight 
of  Kent.’  ,  Finding  it  without  inhabitants,  they 
took  possession  of  the  country,  by  fixing  up  a  Cross 
On  the  spot  where  James-town  was  afterwards  built, 
with  this  inscription,  “  James  King  of  England 
and  this  Island;”  but  they  began  no  settlement, 
nor  made  any  considerable  stay  in  a  country  en¬ 
tirely  uninhabited  and  overgrown  with  woods;  yet 
it  furnished  them  with  fresh  provisions.  They 
found  pigs,  pigeons,  and  parrots,  and  the  Sea 
abounded  with  fish. 

Some  years  after  this,  a  ship  of  Sir  William 
Courteen’s,  a  merchant  of  London,  returning  from 
Brazil,  was  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into  this 
island,  and  finding  refreshments  on  it,  the  master 
and  seamen,  on  their  arrival  in  England,  made  so 
favourable  a  report  of  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  the 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  u 

country,  that  lord  Ley  (afterwards  earl  of  Marlbo¬ 
rough,  and  lord  high  treasurer)  immediately  ob¬ 
tained  from  King  James  the  First  a  grant  ,of  the 
island  to  himself  and  his  heirs  in  perpteufty. 

Courteen  himself  was  a  man  of  extensive  views 
and  magnificent  projects.  He  immediately  be¬ 
gan  (probably  under  the  patronage  of  Marlbo¬ 
rough)  to  form  ideas  of  establishing  a  colony  in 
the  distant  but  promising  territory.  Having  en¬ 
gaged  about  thirty  persons  to  settle  in  the  island, 
and  furnished  them  with  tools,  provisions,  and  ne¬ 
cessaries  of  all  kinds  for  planting  and  fortifying  the 
country,  he  appointed  William  Deane  their  govern¬ 
or,  and  sent  them  away  in  a  ship  called  the  William 
and  John,  commanded  by  John  Powell.  They  an- 
-rived  safe  in  the  latter  end  of  the  year  1624,  and 
laid  the  foundations  of  a  town,  which  in  honour  of 
the  sovereign  they  denominated  James-town; 
and  thus  began  the  first  English  settlement  ,in  the 
island  of  Barhadoes. 

For  some  time  previous  to  this,  it  had  become 
fashionable  in  England,  for  men  of  high  rank  and 
distinction,  to  engage  in  sea  adventures,  proclaiming 
themselves  the  patrons  of  colonization  and  foreign 
commerce.  In  the  list  of  those  who  contributed 
to  the  British  settlements  in  Virginia,  New  Eng¬ 
land,  the  Bermuda  islands,  and  other  places  in  the 
New  World,  may  be  found  the  names  of  many 
of  the  first  nobility  and  gentry  of  the  kingdom. 
Among  others  who  distinguished  themselves  in 


12  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

such  pursuits,  at  the  time  that  Barbadoes  was 
thus  planted  by  a  private  merchant,  was  James 
Hay,  earl  of  Carlisle.  This  nobleman  was  at  that 
juncture  engaged  in  the  establishment  of  a  colony 
in  the  island  of  St.  Christopher,  (as  we  shall  hereaf¬ 
ter  have  occasion  more  particularly  to  relate),  and, 
either  not  knowing  of  the  earl  of  Marlborough’s 
patent,  or  conceiving  that  it  interfered  with  his 
own  pretensions,*  he  applied  for  and  obtained,  in 
the  first  year  of  Charles  I.  a  warrant  for  a  grant,  by 
letters  patent  under  the  great  seal  of  England,  of 
all  the  Charaibean  islands  including  Barbadoes; 
but  when  the  grant  came  to  be  actually  passed, 
the  earl  of  Marlborough  opposed  it,  on  the  ground 
of  priority  of  right.  The  dispute  between  these 
noble  lords  continued  for  a  considerable  time ;  at 
length  the  contending  parties  thought  it  prudent 
to  compromise  the  matter,  and,  on  the  earl  of  Car¬ 
lisle’s  undertaking  to  pay  the  annual  sum  of  £,. 300 
to  the  earl  of  Marlborough  and  his  heirs  for  ever, 
Marlborough  waved  his  patent,  and,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  arrangement,  on  the  2d  of  June 
1627,  the  earl  of  Carlisle’s  patent  passed  the  great 
seal,  who  thereupon  became  sole  proprietor,  f 

*  It  is  said  that  he  had  obtained  from  James  I.  a  grant,  or  warrant 
for  a  grant,  under  the  great  seal,  of  all  the  Charaibean  islands,  which 
the  king  erected  into  a  province  by  the  name  of  Carliola,  on  the  mo¬ 
del  of  the  palatinate  of  Durham. 

f  Among  other  clauses  in  this  grant  are  the  following.  “  Further 
know  ye,  that  we,  for  us,  our  heirs,  and  sucessors,  have  authorized 
and  appointed  the  said  James  earl  of  Carlisle,  and  his  heirs,  (of  whose 
fidelity,  prudence,  justice,  and  wisdom,  we  have  great  confidence). 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


13 


During  this  contest  about  the  disposal  of  coun¬ 
tries,  most  of  which  were  at  that  time  in  the  hands 
of  their  proper  owners,  the  Charaibes;  the  man, 
who  alone  had  the  merit  of  annexing  the  planta¬ 
tion  of  Barbadoes  to  the  crown  of  England,  seems 
to  have  been  shamefully  neglected.  The  earl  of 
Marlborough,  having  secured  to  himself  and  his 
posterity,  the  gratification  I  have  mentioned,  de¬ 
serted  him 5  and  the  lord  Carlisle,  having  done  him 
premeditated  injury,  became  his  irreconcileable  ene¬ 
my.  Courteen,  however,  found  a  friend  in  William 


for  the  good  and  happy  government  of  the  said  province,  whether  for 
the  public  security  of  the  said  province,  or  the  private  utility  of  every 
man,  to  make,  erect,  and  set  forth,  and  under  his  or  their  signet  to 
publish,  such  laws  as  he  the  said  earl  of  Carlisle,  or  his  heirs,  •with 
the  consent ,  assent ,  and  approbation  of  the  free  inhabitants  of  the  said 
province  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  thereunto  to  be  called,  and  in 
such  form  as  lie  or  they,  in  his  or  their  discretion  shall  think  fit  and 
best.  And  these  laws  must  all  men  for  the  time  being,  that  do  live 
within  the  limits  of  the  said  province,  observe  ;  whether  they  be 
bound  to  sea,  or  from  thence  returning  to  England ,  or  any  other  out- 
dominions,  or  any  other  place  appointed,  upon  such  impositions, 
penalties,  imprisonment,  or  restraint  that  it  behoveth,  and  the  quality 
of  the  offence  requireth,  either  upon  tne  body,  or  death  itsen,  to  he 
executed  by  the  said  fames  earl  of  Carlisle,  and  by  his  heirs,  or  by 
his  or  their  deputy,  judges.,  justices,  magistrates,  officers,  and  mi¬ 
nisters,  according  to  the  tenor  and  true  meaning  of  these  presents,  in 
what  cause  soever,  and  with  such  power  as  to  him  the  said  fames  eat  1 
of  Carlisle,  or  his  heirs,  shall  seem  best  :  and  to  dispose  of  offences 
or  riots  whatsoever,  either  by  sea  or  land,  whether  before  judgment 
received,  or  after  remitted,  freed,  pardoned  or  forgiven  ;  and  to  do 
and  to  perform  all  and  every  thing  and  tilings,  which  to  the  fulfilling 
of  justice,  courts  or  manner  of  proceeding  in  their  tribunal,  may  or 
doth  belong  or  appertain,  although  express  mention  of  them  m  these 
presents  he  net  made,  yet  we  have  granted  full  power  by  viitue  of  the^e 


14 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

earl  of  Pembroke,  who  represented  his  case  in 
•such  a  light  to  the  king,  as  to  obtain  a  revocation 
of  Carlisle’s  patent,  and  a  grant  to  himself  in  trust 
for  Courteen. 

But  the  hopes  of  this  worthy  citizen  were  of 
short  continuance.  The  earl  of  Carlisle  was,  at 
that  juncture,  absent  from  the  kingdom,  a  circum¬ 
stance  which  gave  some  colour  to  his  charge  of  in¬ 
justice  and  precipitancy  in  the  proceeding.  On  his 
return  to  England  he  complained  that  he  had 

presents  therein  to  be  made  ;  which  laws  so  absolutely  proclaimed, 
and  by  strength  of  right  supported  as  they  are  granted,  we  will,  en¬ 
join,  charge  and  command,  all  and  every  subject  and  liege  people  of  us, 
our  heirs  and  successors,  so  far  as  them  they  do  concern,  inviolably  to 
keep  and  observe,  under  the  pains  therein  expressed  ;  so  as  notwith¬ 
standing  the  aforesaid  laws  be  agreeable  and  not  repugnant  unto  rea¬ 
son,  nor  against  it;  but  as  convenient  and  agreeable  as  may  be  to  the 
laws,  statutes,  customs,  and  rights  of  our  kingdom  of  England"— 
e<  We  will  also,  of  our  princely  grace,  for  us,  our  heirs  and  succes¬ 
sors,  straightly  charge,  make  and  ordain,  that  the  said  province  be 
of  our  allegiance,  and  that  all  and  every  subject  and  liege  people  of 
us,  our  heirs  and  successors,  brought  or  to  be  brought,  and  their 
■children,  whether  there  born  or  afterwards  to  be  born,  become  natives 
and  subjects  of  us,  our  heirs  and  successors,  and  be  as  free  as  they 
•that  were  born  in  England ;  and  so  their  inheritance  within  our  king¬ 
dom  of  England ,  or  other  our  dominions,  to  seek,  receive,  take,  hold, 
buy,  and  possess,  and  use  and  enjoy  them  as  their  own,  and  to  give, 
sell,  alter,  and  bequeath  them  at  their  pleasure  ;  and  also  freely , 
-quietly,  and  peaceably ,  to  have  and  possess ,  all  the  liberties,  franchises , 
and  privileges  of  this  kingdom,  and  them  to  use  and  enjoy  as  liege  peo¬ 
ple  of  England,  whether  born  or  to  be  born,  without  impediment, 
molestation,  vexation,  injury  or  trouble  of  us  our  heirs  and  successors, 
any  statute,  act,  ordinance,  or  proviso,  to  the  contrary  notwithstandr 
ing.” 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


15 


been  condemned  and  deprived  of  his  property  un¬ 
heard  ;  and  the  monarch  on  the  throne,  who  seems, 
through  the  whole  of  Ms  unfortunate  reign,  rather 
to  have  wanted  resolution  to  pursue  the  right  path, 
than  sagacity  to  discern  it,  trod  back  his  ground  a 
second  time;  for  unable  to  resist  the  clamorous  im¬ 
portunity  of  a  worthless  favourite,  hev  actually  an¬ 
nulled  the  grant  to  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  and,  by 
second  letters  patent  to  the  earl  of  Carlisle,  again 
restored  to  him  the  privileges  of  which  he  had 
himself  a  short  time  before  deprived  him. 


Thus,  by  an  act  of  power  which  its  repugnancy 
and  absurdity  alone  rendered  illegal,  the  earl  of  Car¬ 
lisle  again  found  himself  lord  paramount  of  Barba- 
does  ;  and  in  order  completely  to  ruin  all  the  inte¬ 
rests  in  the  colony  of  his  competitor,  he  proceeded 
to  distribute  the  lands  to  such  persons  as  chose  to 
receive  grants  at  his  hands  on  the  terms  proposed 
to  them.  A  society  of  London  merchants*  accepted 
ten  thousand  acres,  on  conditions  which  promised 
great  advantages  to  the  proprietors  ;  but  they  were 
allowed  the  liberty  of  sending  out  a  person  to  pre¬ 
side  over  their  concerns  in  the  colony,  and  they 
made  choice  for  this  purpose  of  Charles  Wolfer- 
stone,  who  repaired  to  the  island,  accompanied 
with  sixty-four  persons,  each  of  whom  was  autho¬ 
rized  to  take  up  one  hundred  acres  of  land. 

*  The  names  of  those  merchants  were  Marmaduke  Brandon,  Wil¬ 
liam  Perkin,  Alexander  Banister,  Robert  Wheatley,  Edmond  Foster, 
Robert  Swinnerton,  Henry  Wheatley,  John  Charles,  and  John  Far- 
fingdon. 


16  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

These  people  landed  on  the  fifth  of  July,  1628, 
at  which  time  Courteen’s  settlement  was  in  a  very 
promising  condition ;  but  Wolferstone  declared  it 
an  encroachment  and  usurpation,  and  being  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  arrival  of  Sir  William  Tufton,  who 
was  sent  out  as  chief  governor  by  lord  Carlisle,  in 
1629,  with  a  force  sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of 
his  pretensions,  he  compelled  the  friends  of  Cour- 
teen  to  submit 3  and  the  interests  of  the  latter  were 
thenceforth  swallowed  up  and  forgotten.* 

The  facts  which  I  have  thus  recited  have  been 
related  so  often  by  others,  that  an  apology  might  be 
necessary  for  their  insertion  in  this  work,  were  it 
not,  that  by  comparing  one  account  with  another, 
I  have  been  enabled  to  correct  some  important  er¬ 
rors  in  each.  And  the  claim  of  the  earl  of  Carlisle, 
having  originally  introduced  and  established  the  very 
heavy  internal  imposition  on  their  gross  produce, 
to  which  the  planters  of  this  and  some  of  the 
neighbouring  islands  are  to  this  day  liable,  I  have 
thought  it  necessary,  to  be  particular  and  minute, 
in  tracing  the  claim  itself  from  the  beginning.  In 
what  manner  it  produced  the  burthen  in  question, 
and  how  Barbadoes  reverted  from  a  proprietary 
to  a  royal  government,  I  shall  now  proceed  to 
relate. 

*  In  this  year,  Sir  William  Tufton  gave  one  hundred  and  forty 
grants  of  land,  comprizing  in  the  whole  15,872  acres;  and  on  the 
23d  of  February,  1630,  he  passed  divers  laws,  and  among  others, 
one  for  dividing  the  island  into  six  parishes; 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  %7 

The  administration  of  Sir  William  Tufton,  the 
first  governor  appointed  by  lord  Carlisle,  proving 
disagreeable  to  his  lordship,  captain  Henry  Hawley 
was  sent  over  in  1631  to  supersede  him.  Tufton 
resenting  this  measure,  procured  the  signatures  of 
some  of  the  planters  to  a  petition  complaining  of 
Hawley’s  conduct.  Hawley  construed  this  petition 
into  an  act  of  mutiny  on  the  part  of  Tufton,  for 
which  he  had  him  tried  and  condemned  by  a  court- 
martial,  and  with  very  little  ceremony  caused  him 
to  be  shot  to  death ;  a  proceeding  universally  ex¬ 
claimed  against  as  a  most  horrid  and  atrocious  mur¬ 
der.  Hawley,  however,  though  recalled  on  this 
account,  not  only  escaped  punishment  through  the 
interest  of  his  noble  patron,  but  was  soon  after¬ 
wards  sent  back  again  as  chief  governor;  in  which 
capacity  he  remained  till  1638,  when  he  was  driven 
from  the  country  by  the  united  voice  of  all  the 
inhabitants ;  who,  however,  permitted  his  brother 
William  Elawley,  to  act  as  commander  in  chief, 
until  a  governor  should  be  nominated  at  home.  He 
was  succeeded  by  major  Hunckes,  who  leaving  the 
island  in  1641,  appointed  Philip  Bell,  Esq.  his  de¬ 
puty,  and  Bell,  in  1645,  was  appointed  chief  go¬ 
vernor.*  But  the  conduct  of  Hawley,  thus  violent 

*  During  the  administration  of  this  gentleman,  many  salutary  laws 
were  passed  5  among  others  the  following: 

tft.  “  An  aft  for  the  continuance  and  observation  of  all  acts  and 
statutes  not  repealed  5  which  act  recites  that  there  were  divers  and  sun¬ 
dry  good  and  wholesome  laws,  statutes  and  ordinances  provided,  en¬ 
acted,  and  made,  assigned,  and  agreed  upon,  by  and  with  the  assent,' 

Vol.  II. 


c 


i8  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

and  bloody,  and  the  support  which  he  received 
from  the  proprietor,  had  alienated  the  minds  of  the 
new  settlers  from  power  thus  delegated  and  abused ; 
and  the  proprietor’s  authority  lost  ground  every  day. 
In  the  mean  time  the  civil  war  in  England  caused 
many  people,  of  peaceable  tempers  and  disposi¬ 
tions,  chiefly  royalists  to  take  refuge  in  this  island ; 
and  the  consequent  ruin  of  the  king’s  affairs  in¬ 
duced  a  still  greater  number,  many  of  whom  had 

consent,  and  approbation  of  the  governor,  council,  and  freeholders  out 
of  every  parish  of  the  island,  intituled,  A  General  Assembly  for  that 
purpose  elected,  made ,  and  chosen.  And  it  is  thereby  enacted,  that 
none  of  those  laws  shall  he  altered,  or  any  thing  ad'ed  to  them,  with¬ 
out  the  consent  of  a  like  General  Assembly ,  And  that  every  parish 
should  have  two  representatives  at  least,  to  be  elected  by  the  free¬ 
holders. 

sd.  An  addition  to  an  act  intituled,  “  An  act  for  settling  the  estates 
and  titles  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  island  to  their  possessions  ;n  their 
several  plantations  within  the  same  it  is  therein  recited,  that  in  a 
clause  in  the  first  act  it  is  ordained,  that  all  the  inhabitants  of  this 
island,  that  were  in  quiet  possession  of  any  lands  or  tenements  by 
virtue  of  any  warrant  from  any  former  governor,  or  by  conveyance 
or  other  act  in  law,  from  them  who  had  the  same  warrant,  should 
have,  hold,  and  enjoy  the  same,  as  their  f  ee  estate :  and  as  some 
scruples  had  since  arisen,  whether  an  estate  for  life  or  inheritance 
might  be  construed  from  the  same,  for  want  of  the  words  their  heirs  ; 
to  the  intent  the  same  might  be  more  fully  explained,  and  all 
disputes  of  that  kind  for  the  future  abolished,  it  is  enacted,  that  by 
the  words  as  their  free  estates ,  was  meant,  the  whole  estate  and  inhe¬ 
ritance  of  the  respective  plantations  within  this  island,  so  that  by 
Such  possession  in  manner  as  by  the  said  act  is  expressed,  the  said 
inhabitants  are  thereby  adjudged  and  declared  to  have  and  to  hold 
their  lands  of  right  to  them,  to  dispose  of  or  alienate,  or  otherwise  to 
descend,  or  be  confirmed  to  their  heirs  for  ever.” 


THE  HISTORY, 

CIVIL  AND  COMMERCIAL, 

OF  THE 

BRITISH  COLONIES 

IN  THE 


WEST  INDIES. 


WEST  INDIES. 


19 


CHAP.  I.] 

been  officers  of  rank  in  his  service,  to  follow  their 
example.  The  emigration  from  the  mother-coun¬ 
try  to  this  island  was  indeed  so  great  during  the 
commotions  in  England,  that  in  1650  it  was  com¬ 
puted  there  were  20,000  white  men  in  Barbadoes, 
half  of  them  able  to  bear  arms,  and  furnishing 
even  a  regiment  of  horse  to  the  number  of  one 
thousand. 

Cf  These  adventurers,”  says  lord  Clarendon, 
t(  planted  without  any  body’s  leave,  and  without 
“  being  opposed  or  contradicted  by  any  body.” 
The  case  seems  to  have  been  that  the  governor 
granted  lands  to  all  who  applied,  on  receiving  a 
gratuity  for  himself ;  and  the  claim  of  the  proprie¬ 
tor,  whether  disputed  in  the  island,  or  disregarded 
amidst  the  confusions  at  home,  was  at  length  tacitly 
and  silently  relinquished.* 

The  colony  left  to  its  own  efforts,  and  enjoying 
an  unlimited  freedom  of  trade,  flourished  beyond 
example.  In  the  year  1646,  however,  the  then 
earl  of  Carlisle,  who  was  son  and  heir  of  the  pa¬ 
tentee,  stimulated  by  the  renown  of  its  wealth  and 
prosperity,  began  to  revive  his  claims  as  hereditary 
proprietor ;  and  entering  into  a  treaty  with  lord 
Willoughby  of  Parham,  conveyed  to  that  nobleman 
all  his  rights  by  lease  for  twenty  one  years,  on  con¬ 
dition  of  receiving  one  half  the  profits  in  the  mean 


*  Lord  Carlisle  had  originally  stipulated  for  an  annual  tribute  of  for¬ 
ty  pounds  of  cotton  wool  froa!  each  person  who  held  lands  under  his 


20 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

time;  but  justly  apprehending,  that  the  resident 
planters  might  dispute  his  pretensions,  he  very 
readily  concurred  with  lord  Willoughby  in  soliciting 
a  commission  for  the  latter,  as  chief  governor,  un¬ 
der  the  sanction  of  regal  authority.* 

This,  although  an  absolute  dereliction  of  the  pro* 
prietaryship,  was  asked  and  obtained;  and  the  lord 
Willoughby,  thus  commissioned,  embarked  for  his 
government;  and,  in  consideration  of  the  royal  ap¬ 
pointment,  was  received  by  the  inhabitants,  who 
were  warmly  attached  to  the  King’s  interests,  with 
respect  and  obedience.  It  seems  probable,  that  at 
his  first  coming  he  said  nothing  of  his  lease  from 
Carlisle ,  trusting  rather  to  future  management  for 
he  re-establishment  of  that  lord’s  pretensions,  than 
to  an  open  avowal  of  them  on  his  arrival.  We  are 
told,  however,  by  lord  Clarendon,  that  he  obtained 
from  the  planters  a  promise  of  a  contribution  to  the 
proprietor;  but  before  it  was  carried  into  effect,  the, 
regal  authority  was  abolished  in  England,  and  Bar- 
badoes  reduced  to  the  obedience  of  the  new  re¬ 
public,  by  whom  another  governor,  was  appointed. 

On  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  and  the  re¬ 
establishment  of  the  royal  authority  over  all  the 


*  When  this  application  was  made,  the  King  was  in  the  hands  of 
the  parliament  5  the  commission  therefore,  with  his  Majesty’s  privity 
and  approbation,  was  signed  by  the  prince  of  Wales,  at  that  time  in 
Holland. 


ghap.  I.]  WEST  INDIES.  21 

British  dominions,*  lord  Willoughby,  who  had 
eight  or  nine  years  of  his  lease  unexpired,  applied 
to  the  king  for  leave  to  return  to  his  government  of 
Barbadoes.  To  this  application  no  objection  would 
have  been  made  by  the  inhabitants,  if  his  lordship, 
had  considered  himself  merely  as  representative  of 
the  crown*  but  his  connection  and  contract  with 
the  earl  of  Carlisle,  were  by  this  time  sufficiently 
understood  by  the  planters,  who  saw  with  astonish¬ 
ment,  that  they  were  regarded  by  those  great  lords 
as  mere  tenants  at  will  of  their  possessions.  They 
solicited  therefore  the  king’s  support  and  protec¬ 
tion.  “  They  pleaded,”  says  Clarendon,  <c  that  they 
were  the  king’s  subjects;  that  they  had  repaired  to 
Barbadoes  as  to  a  desolate  place,  and  had  by  their 
industry  obtained  a  livelihood  there,  when  they 
could  not  with  a  good  conscience  stay  in  England ; 
that  if  they  should  now  be  left  to  those  lords  to 
ransom  themselves  and  compound  for  their  estates, 
they  must  leave  the  country,  and  the  plantation  be 
destroyed,  which  yielded  his  majesty  so  great  a  re¬ 
venue.”  Respecting  the  charter  granted  to  the  earl 
of  Carlisle,  they  insisted,  positively,  that  it  was 
void  in  law ;  and  they  made  two  humble  proposi¬ 
tions  to  the  king,  either  that  his  majesty  would 


*  On  the  iSth  of  February,  1661,  his  Majesty  honoured  thirteen 
gentlemen  of  Barbadoes  with  the  dignity  of  baronetage,  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  their  sufferings  and  loyalty  during  the  civil  war  :  They  were.  Sir 
John  Colleton,  Sir  James  Modi  ford.  Sir  James  Drax,  Sir  Robert  Da- 
vers,  Sir  Robert  Racket,  Sir  John  Yeamans,  Sir  Timothy  Thornhill, 
Sir  John  Whitham,  Sir  Robert  Legard,  Sir  John  Worsum,  Sir  John 
Rawdon,  Sir  Edwyn  Stede,  Sir  Willoughby  Chamberlayne. 


22 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

give  them  leave  to  institute  in  his  name,  but  at 
their  own  cost,  a  process  in  the  Exchequer  for  try¬ 
ing  the  validity  of  the  earl’s  patent;  or  that  he 
would  leave  those  who  claimed  under  it  (for  the 
second  earl  of  Carlisle  dying  in  the  interim,  had 
bequeathed  his  rights  in  the  West  Indies  to  the 
earl  of  Kinnoul)  to  their  legal  remedy,  absolutely 
denying  that  either  the  late  or  former  lord  Carlisle 
had  sustained  the  smallest  expense  in  settling  the 
colony. 

Instead  of  consenting  to  either  of  those  most 
reasonable  propositions,  the  king  ordered  inquiry 
to  be  made  into  the  several  allegations  and  claims  of 
the  parties  concerned,  by  a  committee  of  the  privy- 
council  ;  before  whom  some  of  the  planters  being 
heard,  one  of  them,  in  order  more  readily  to  induce 
the  king  to  take  the  sovereignty  of  the  island  into 
his  own  hands,  offered,  in  the  name  of  the  inha¬ 
bitants,  to  consent,  in  that  case,  to  lay  an  impo¬ 
sition  of  so  much  in  the  hundred  on  the  produce 
of  their  estates,  out  of  which  his  Majesty’s  go¬ 
vernor  might  be  honourably  supported,  and  the 
king  dispose  of  the  overplus  as  he  should  think  fit. 
To  a  monarch  of  Charles’s  disposition,  this  was 
too  tempting  a  proposition  to  be  resisted.  We  are 
informed,  that  his  majesty  received  the  offer  very 
graciously  ;  cc  and  the  next  care  of  the  committee,” 
adds  the  noble  historian  who  was  himself  of  that 
body,  “  was  to  make  some  computation,  that  might 
be  depended  upon,  as  to  the  yearly  revenue  that 
would  arise  upon  the  imposition  within  the  island.’ 


2  3 


CHAP.  I.]  WEST  INDIES. 

But  the  planters,  when  called  upon  the  next  day  to 
give  satisfaction  in  this  particular,  insisted  that  Mr. 
Kendall,  the  person  who  had  made  the  offer  had  no 
authority  to  undertake  for  them,  or  the  inhabitants 
within  the  island  5  and  the  utmost  they  could  be 
brought  to  promise  for  themselves  was,  that  they 
would  use  their  endeavours  with  their  friends  in  the 
island,  to  settle  such  a  revenue  on  the  crown,  as  the 
circumstances  of  the  colony  would  admit  of,  which 
they  said  the  assembly  alone  wTas  competent  to  de¬ 
termine. 

The  prospect  of  a  revenue,  though  distant  and 
uncertain,  brought  forward  the  creditors  of  the 
earl  of  Carlisle,  the  patentee,  who  was  indebted, 
it  seems,  at  his  death,  in  the  sum  of  <£80,000, 
and  they  had  no  hopes  of  being  paid  but  from  the 
profits  of  his  West  Indian  possessions.  The  heirs 
of  the  earl  of  Marlborough  likewise  put  in  their 
claim  for  the  arrearage  of  the  annuity  of  ,£.300, 
granted  under  the  original  compromise,  which  I 
have  before  mentioned;  and  the  lord  Willoughby 
insisted  at  the  same  time  on  receiving  a  moiety  of 
whatever  profits  might  arise  during  the  remainder  of 
the  term  yet  unexpired  in  his  lease.  The  other 
moiety,  during  that  time,  and  the  whole  in  rever¬ 
sion,  w7as  claimed  by  the  earl  of  Kinnoul. 

To  satisfy  these  several  claimants,  and  secure  a 
perpetual  revenue  to  the  crown,  was  a  work  of 
difficulty,  and  its  accomplishment  seems  to  have 
been  the  sole  aim' of  the  King’s  ministers;  by 


/ 


24 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

whom,  after  a  tedious  but  partial  investigation, 
(considering  the  colony  as  wholly  at  the  king’s 
mercy),  it  was  finally  ordered,  that  the  lord  Wil¬ 
loughby  should  immediately  repair  to  his  govern¬ 
ment,  and  insist  on  the  grant  and  establishment 
by  the  assembly  of  a  permanent  and  irrevocable 
revenue  of  four  and  a  half  per  cent,  to  be  paid  in 
specie,  on  all  dead  commodities,  the  growth  of 
the  island,  shipped  to  any  port  of  the  world; 
the  money  arising  therefrom  to  be  applied  as  fol¬ 
lows: 

First,  towards  an  honourable  and  immediate 
provision  for  the  earl  of  Kinnoul,  who,  it  was  al¬ 
leged,  had  sacrificed  his  fortune  in  the  king’s 
service,  and  who  covenanted,  on  such  provision 
being  secured  to  him,  to  surrender  the  Carlisle 
patent  to  the  crown. 

Secondly,  towards  satisfaction  and  full  discharge 
of  the  earl  of  Marlborough’s  annuity. 

Thirdly,  it  was  stipulated  that  the  surplus 
should  be  divided  equally  between  the  creditors 
of  the  earl  of  Carlisle  and  the  lord  Willoughby,  du¬ 
ring  the  term  yet  unexpired  of  his  lordship’s  lease. 
On  the  expiration  thereof,  the  remainder,  after 
providing  j£.  1 ,200  per  annum  for  the  King’s  go¬ 
vernor  for  the  time  being,  was  ordered  to  be  paid 
among  the  said  creditors  till  their  demands  were 
fully  satisfied  and  discharged: 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


25 


Fourthly,  on  the  extinction  of  those  several  in¬ 
cumbrances  it  was  stipulated,  that  the  whole  re 
venue,  subject  to  the  charge  of  £.  1,200  per  an¬ 
num  to  the  governor,  should  be  at  the  disposal  of 
the  crown. 


On  these  terms  it  was  understood  that  the  pro¬ 
prietary  government  was  to  be  dissolved,  and  that 
the  planters  were  to  consider  themselves  as  legally 
confirmed  in  possession  of  their  estates;  and  to  car¬ 
ry  into  effect  this  important  point,  on  which  the 
whole  arrangement  depended,  (the  grant  of  a  per¬ 
petual  revenue  by  the  assembly),  lord  Willoughby 
returned  to  his  government  in  1663. 

It  is  not  wonderful  that  the  planters,  on  his  lord¬ 
ship’s  arrival,  though  devoted  to  the  interests  of 
the  crown,  should  have  loudly  murmured  at  the 
conduct  and  determination  of  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  in  the  progress  and  conclusion  of  the  whole 
business.  Clarendon  himself  confesses,  that  the 
grant  to  Carlisle  was  voidable  by  law.  The  king 
therefore  laid  them  under  no  great  obligation  in  ob¬ 
taining  a  surrender  of  it.  Many  of  the  planters 
had  been  obliged  to  quit  their  native  country  in 
consequence  of  their  exertions  in  support  of  the 
royal  cause  during  the  civil  war;  by  the  late  settle¬ 
ment,  they  perceived  a  regard  expressed  towards 
every  interest  concerned  but  their  own;  and  the 
return  which  they  met  with,  both  for  their  former 
services,  and  also  for  augmenting  the  trade,  reve¬ 
nue,  and  dominion  of  the  parent  state  by’their  re~ 
Vol.  II. 


n 


i6 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

cent  labours,  was  a  demand  of  a  contribution, 
which  they  stated  would  amount  to  ten  per  cent, 
on  the  clear  profits  of  their  estates  for  ever. 

But  their  complaints,  though  well  founded,  were 
unavailing.  The  king  and  his  governor  were  too 
deeply  interested  to  recede  5  the  assembly  was  call¬ 
ed  upon  to  forge  chains  for  themselves  and  their 
children ;  and  if  persuasion  should  fail,  force  was  not 
only  at  hand,  but  was  actually  employed  to  compel 
them  to  submission.  Colonel  Farmer,  who  led  the 
party  in  opposition,  was  arrested  and  sent  prisoner 
to  England,  on  a  charge  of  mutiny  and  treason, 
nor  was  he  released  till  after  a  tedious  and  severe 
confinement.  Awed  by  this  example,  and  sensi¬ 
ble  that  no  support  could  be  expected  from  the  peo¬ 
ple  at  home,  whose  privileges  lay  prostrate  at  the 
feet  of  the  restored  monarch,  the  assembly  passed 
an  act  for  the  purposes  required  of  them ;  and  their 
posterity  still  bear,  and  it  is  apprehended  will  long 
continue  to  bear,  the  burthen  of  it!* 


*  I  have  thought  it  may  he  satisfactory  to  the  reader  to  have  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  perusing  the  act  at  large,  which  I  therefore  subjoin,  pre¬ 
mising,  that  the  clause  which  exempts  the  lands  called  the  10,000  acres-, 
and  also  that  which  stipulates  for  the  building  a  sessions-house,  and  a 
prison,  and  providing  for  all  other  public  charges  incumbent  on  the 
government,  out  of  the  monies  to  be  raised  by  the  act,  have  been 
equally  disregarded  by  the  crown.  The  session-house  and  prison  were 
not  finished  until  the  year  1730,  and  the  expense  (upwards  of  £.5,000) 
was  then  defrayed  by  a  special  tax  on  the  inhabitants;  and  there  was 
raised  by  other  taxes  no  less  a  sum  than  £.19,440  ,j.  4 d.  in  three 
years  (viz.  from  1745  to  1748)  for  the  repair  of  the  fortifications. 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  27 

The  conduct  of  the  lord  chancellor  Clarendon 
in  this  affair,  who  indeed  appears  to  have  been 
the  person  chiefly  consulted  in  it,  was  afterwards 
thought  so  justly  reprehensible,  as  to  give  occasion 
to  the  eighth  article  of  his  impeachment  by  the 


An  ACT  for  settling  the  Impost  on  the  Commodities  of  the  Growth  of  this 
Island ;  passed  the  12th  of  September,  1663 .-—No.  36. 

Whereas  our  late  Sovereign  Lord  Charlie?  the  First,  of  blessed 
memory,  did,  by  his  letters  patent  under  the  great  seal  of  England, 
grant  and  convey  unto  James  Earl  q>f  Carlisle  and  his  heirs  for  ever, 
the  Propriety  of  this  island  of  Barbadoes  ;  i^nd  his  sacred  majesty  that 
now  is  having  by  purchase  inyested  Jii mSjel f  in  all  the  rights  of  the  said 
earl  of  Carlisle,  and  in  all  other  rights  which  any  other  person  may 
claim  from  that  patent,  or  any  other  ;  and  thereby,  more  immediately 
and  particularly,  hath  taken  this  island  into  his  royal  protection. 
And  his  most  excellent  majesty  having,  by  letters  patent  under  the 
great  seal  of  England,  bearing  date  the  twelfth  of  June,  in  the  fif¬ 
teenth  year  of  his  reign,  appointed  his  excellency  Francis  Lord  Wil¬ 
loughby  of  Parham,  captain-general  and  chief  governor  of  Barbadoes 
and  all  the  Carribbee  islands,  with  full  power  and  authority  10  grant, 
confirm,  and  assure  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  same,  and  their  heirs, 
for  ever,  all  lands,  tenements,  and  hereditaments  under  his  majesty’s 
great  seal  appointed  for  Barbadoes  and  the  rest  of  the  Carribbee 
islands,  as,  relation  being  thereunto  had,  may  and  doth  more  at  large 
appear.  And  whereas,  by  virtue  of  the  said  earl  of  Carlisle’s  patent, 
divers  governors  and  agents  have  been  sent  over  hither,  with  authority 
to  lay  out,  set,  grant,  or  convey  in  parcels  the  lands  within  this  island, 
to  such  persons  as  they  should  think  fit  3  which  was  by  them,  in  their 
respective  times,  as  much  as  in  them  lay,  accordingly  performed.  And 
whereas  many  have  not  their  grants,  warrants,  and  other  evidences  for 
their  said  lands,  and  others,  by  reason  of  the  ignorances  of  those, 
want  sufficient  and  legal  words  to  create  inheritances  in  them  and  their 
heirs,  and  others  that  never  recorded  their  grants,  or  warrants,  and 
Others  that  can  make  no  proof  of  any  grants  or  warrants  they  ever  had 


a8 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

House  of  Commons  in  the  year  1667.  From  his 
answer  to  that  article,  I  have  collected  (chiefly  in 
his  own  words)  great  part  of  the  account  that  I 
have  given ;  and  there  cannot  be  a  stronger  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  tendency  of  power  to  pervert  the 


for  their  lands;  and  yet  have  been  long  and  quiet  possessors  of  the 
same,  and  bestowed  great  charges  thereon.  And  whereas  the  acknow¬ 
ledgment  of  forty  pounds  of  cotton  per  head,  and  other  taxes  and  com¬ 
positions  formerly  raised  to  the  eal  of  Carlisle,  was  held  very  heavy: 
For  a  full  remedy  thereof  for  all  the  defects  afore-related,  and  quiet¬ 
ing  the  possessions  and  settling  the  tenures  of  the  inhabitants  of  this 
island ;  Be  it  enacted  by  his  excellency  Francis  Lord  Willoughby  of 
Parham,  See.  his  council,  and  gentlemen  of  the  assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same,  that  notwithstanding  the  defects  afore-rela¬ 
ted  all  the  now  rightful  possessors  of  lands,  tenements  and  heredita¬ 
ments  within  this  island,  according  to  the  laws  and  customs  thereof, 
may  at  all  times  repair  unto  his  excellency  for  the  full  confirmation  of 
their  estates  and  tenures,  and  then  and  there  shall  and  may  receive  such 
full  confirmation  and  assurance,  under  his  majesty’s  great  seal  for  this 
island,  as  they  can  reasonably  advise  or  desire,  according  to  the  true 
intent  and  meaning  of  this  act.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  au¬ 
thority  aforesaid,  that  all  and  every  the  payments  of  forty  pounds  of 
cotton  per  head,  and  all  other  duties,  rents,  and  arrears  of  rent  which 
have  or  might  have  been  levied,  be  from  henceforth  absolutely  and 
fully  released  and  made  void ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  island 
have  and  hold  their  seveial  plantations  to  them  and  their  heirs  forever, 
in  free  and  common  soccage,  yielding  and  paying  therefore,  at  the  Feast 
of  St.  Michael  every  year,  if  the  same  be  lawfully  demanded,  one  ear 
of  Indian  corn  to  his  majesty,  his  heirs  and  successors  for  ever,  in  full 
and  free  discharge  of  all  rents  and  services  for  the  future  whatsoever, 
jn  consideration  of  the  release  of  the  said  forty  pounds,  and  in  consi¬ 
deration  of  the  confirmation  of  all  e  tates  in  this  island  as  aforesaid, 
and  in  acknowledgment  of  his  majesty  s  grace  and  favour  in  sending 
£0  and  appointing  over  us  his  said  excellency',  of  whose  prudence  and 
moderate  government  we  have  heretofore  had  large  experience,  and  do 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


1CJ 


judgment,  and  cloud  the  faculties  of  the  wisest  and 
worthiest  of  men,  than  the  justification  he  has  of¬ 
fered.  He  even  claims  great  merit  in  not  having 
advised  the  king  to  possess  himself  of  the  whole 
island  of  Barbadoes,  without  any  regard  to  the 
planters  or  creditors  concerned  in  the  issue. 


rest  most  assured  thereof  for  the  future.  And  forasmuch  as  nothing 
conduceth  more  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  any  place,  and  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  every  single  person  therein,  than  that  the  public  revenue 
thereof  maybe  in  some  measure  propoitioned  to  the  public  charges 
and  expenses;  and  also  well  weighing  the  great  charges  that  there 
must  be  of  necessity  in  maintaining  the  honour  and  dignity  of  his  ma¬ 
jesty’s  authority  here;  the  public  meeting  of  the  sessions,  the  often 
attendance  of  the  council,  the  reparation  of  the  forts,  the  building  a 
sssiions-kou.se  and  a  prison,  and  all  other  public  charges  incumbent  on  the 
government)  do,  in  consideration  thereof,  give  and  grant  unto  his 
majesty,  his  heirs  and  successors  for  ever,  and  do  most  humbly  desire 
your  excellency  to  accept  these  our  grants  ;  and  we  humbly  pray  your 
excellency  that  it  may  be  enacted,  and  be  it  enacted  by  his  excelleticy 
Francis  Lord  Willoughby  of  Parham,  captain-general  and  chief  go¬ 
vernor  of  this  island  of  Barbadoes,  and  all  other  the  Carribbee  islands, 
and  by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  council  and  the  gentlemen  of 
the  assembly,  representatives  of  this  island,  and  by  authority  of 
the  same,  That  an  impost  or  custom  be,  from  and  after  publication 
hereof,  raised  upon  the  native  commodities  of  this  island,  after  the 
proportions,  and  in  manner  and  form  as  is  hereafter  set  down  and  ap¬ 
pointed  ;  that  is  to  say,  upon  all  dead  commodities  of  the  growth 
or  produce  of  this  island,  that  shall  be  shipped  off  the  same,  shall  be 
paid  to  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King,  his  heirs  and  successors  for 
ever,  four  and  a  half  in  specie  for  every  five  score. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  and  declared  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  if  any  goods  before  mentioned,  on  which  the  said  custom  is  im¬ 
posed,  and  due,  by  this  act,  shall  at  any  time  hereafter  be  shipped  or 
put  into  any  boat  or  other  vessel,  to  the  intent  to  be  carried  into  any 


JO  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

The  prosecution  of  this  great  statesman,  howe¬ 
ver,  on  this  account,  was  of  no  advantage  to  the 
suffering  planters;  for  in  this,  as  in  many  other 
cases,  the  redress  of  a  grievance,  and  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  its  author,  were  objects  of  very  distinct 
consideration.  Those  who  sought  the  ruin  of  Cla- 

parts  beyond  the  seas,  the  3aid  imposition  due  for  the  same  not  paid, 
compounded  for,  or  lawfully  tendered  to  the  collectors  or  their  depu¬ 
ties,  or  not  having  agreed  with  the  commissioners  for  that  purpose  to 
be  appointed,  or  their  deputies  for  the  same,  according  to  the  true  in¬ 
tent  and  meaning  of  the  said  act,  that  then,  and  from  thenceforth* 
shall  the  said  goods  be  forfeit,  the  moiety  thereof  to  be  to  our  Sove¬ 
reign  Lord  the  King,  and  the  other  to  him  that  shall  inform,  seize, 
and  sue  for  the  same  in  any  court  of  record  within  this  island  5  which 
grants  are  left  to  your  excellency’s  own  way  of  levying,  in  full  confi¬ 
dence  and  assurance  that  your  excellency  will  take  such  course  for  the 
collecting  and  gathering  Gf  the  said  impost,  without  any  charge,  duty 
@r  fees,  as  may  be  most  for  the  ease  of  the  people  of  this  island. 

Provided  nevertheless,  That  neither  this  act,  nor  any  thing  therein 
contained,  shall  extend  or  be  construed  to  bar  his  majesty,  or  his  said 
excellency,  from  his  or  their  right  to  any  land  granted,  or  any  in- 
croachments  made  upon  the  sea,  since  the  year  one  thousand  six  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty,  or  to  any  lands  commonly  called  or  known  by  the  naive  of 
‘The  Ten  Thousand  Acres ;  the  merchants  land,  granted  by  the  late  earl 
of  Carlisle,  or  his  father,  unto  Marmaduke  Rawden,  esquire,  Willi¬ 
am  Perkins,  Alexander  Bannister,  Edmund  Forster,  Captain  Wheat- 
ley,  and  others  their  associates,  on  certain  covenants  and  conditions  : 
Provided  also,  that  the  growth  and  produce  of  the  said  lands,  mention - 
ed  in  the  preceding  proviso,  be  not  liable  to  any  tax,  impost ,  or  custom, 
imposed  by  this  act-,  any  thing  in  the  same  seeming  to  the  contrary  not¬ 
withstanding. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  one  act 
made  the  seventeenth  day  of  January  one  thousand  six  hundred  and 
fifty,  intituled,  An  act  importing  the  customs  imposed  and  granted 


WEST  INDIES. 


3i 


CHAP.  I.] 

rendon,  had  nothing  less  in  view  than  the  removal 
of  oppression,  from  subjects  so  remote  as  those  of 
Barbadoes. 

In  thus  tracing  the  origin,  progress,  and  termi¬ 
nation  of  the  proprietary  government  in  this  island, 
I  have  purposely  chosen  not  to  break  the  thread  of 

by  the  council,  and  gentlemen  of  the  assembly,  to  the  right  honoura¬ 
ble  Francis  Lord  Willoughby  of  Parham,  lord  lieutenant-general  of 
the  province  of  Carolina,  and  governor  of  Barbadoes  ;  as  also,  his 
lordship’s  confirmation  of  the  rights  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  island 
to  their  several  estates,  with  the  tenure  and  rent  thereon  created,  be, 
and  is  from  henceforth  repealed,  made  void,  frustrate,  of  none  effect, 
to  all  intents,  constructions,  and  purposes  whatsoever. 


In  1684,  the  assembly  of  this  island  proposed  to  farm  the  four  and 
a  half  per  cent,  for  eleven  years,  for  the  annual  rent  of  £.6,000  ster¬ 
ling,  to  be  paid  into  the  exchequer ;  the  governor  and  council  concur¬ 
red,  and  it  was  agreed  that  £.7,000  currency  per  annum  should  be 
raised  by  a  tax  of  twenty-one  pence  per  acre,  on  all  lands  amounting 
to  ten  or  more  acres.  The  towns  and  traders  to  be  taxed  £.500  ster¬ 
ling.  An  act  passed  March  19th,  1684,  for  this  purpose,  and  was 
sent  home;  but  the  lords  of  the  committee  for  trade  and  Dlantations 
reported,  that  the  commissioners  of  the  customs  with  whom  they  had 
advised,  were  of  opinion,  that  they  could  make  no  estimate  of  the  duty, 
until  they  had  experienced  the  produce  thereof,  under  the  then  m  >nage- 
ment,  for  one  year  at  least;  and  that  the  commissioners  appointed  for 
managing  the  said  duty  in  Barbadoes,  had  assured  them  the  duty  would 
be  worth  from  £.8,000  to  £.10,000  per  annum.  So  the  act  was  re¬ 
pealed.  / 

This  proposal  to  farm  the  four  and  an  half  per  cent,  duty,  was 
made  in  consequence  of  governor  Dutton’s  signifying  to  the  council 
and  assembly,  on  his  arrival  in  1680,  that  his  majesty  was  inclined  to 
commute  the  tax,  for  a  reasonable  recompense. 


32 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

my  narration,  by  recording  any  intermediate  events 
of  a  nature  foreign  to  that  subject.  Soon  after  the 
establishment  of  the  commonwealth  in  England, 
circumstances  however  arose,  respecting  this  colo¬ 
ny,  which  have  produced  such  effects  on  the  gene¬ 
ral  commerce  of  Great  Britain,  as  cannot  be  over¬ 
looked  in  an  historical  and  commercial  survey  of 
her  West  Indian  plantations,  and  of  which  I  shall 
now  give  some  account. 

The  reader  has  been  sufficiently  apprized  of  the 
attachment  of  the  Barbadians  towards  the  regal  go¬ 
vernment.  One  of  the  first  acts  passed  by  the  as¬ 
sembly,  after  the  arrival  of  the  Lord  Willoughby 
for  the  first  time,  (1647),  was  a  declaration  of  their 
allegiance  and  fidelity  to  the  unfortunate  Charles 
the  First,  at  that  time  a  prisoner  to  the  army;  and 
on  the  death  of  that  monarch,  the  popular  resent¬ 
ment  against  his  persecutors  ran  so  high  in  this 
island,  that  the  few  planters  who  were  suspected 
to  be  in  the  interest  of  the  parliament,  thought  it 
necessary  to  seek  protection  in  England. 

To  punish  such  stubborn  defenders  of  a  ruined 
cause,  the  parliament  resolved,  in  1651,  to  send  a 
powerful  armament  for  the  reduction  of  all  the 
English  colonies  in  America  and  the  West  Indies; 
but  particularly  Barbadoes,  at  that  time  the  most 
important  and  hostile  of  them  all. 

Many,  indeed,  were  the  motives  which  instiga¬ 
ted  the  parliament  to  tfiis  determination.  From 


33 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES. 

the  beginning  of  the  commotions  in  the  mother- 
country,  the  planters,  having  no  other  means  of 
conveying  the  produce  of  their  lands  to  Europe, 
had  employed  in  this  necessary  navigation,  many 
of  the  ships  and  seamen  of  Holland  5  and  at  this 
juncture  the  English  government  entertained  very 
hostile  intentions  towards  the  subjects  of  that  re¬ 
public.  The  reduction  of  Barbadoes  would  at  once 
punish  the  colonists,  and  enable  the  English  parli¬ 
ament  to  deprive  the  Dutch  of  so  profitable  an  in¬ 
tercourse  with  them ;  it  would  also  enrich  the  trea¬ 
sury  of  the  new  government,  by  the  confiscation 
of  many  valuable  ships  and  cargoes  in  the  harbours 
of  that  and  the  other  islands.  The  parliament  had 
reason  likewise,  it  was  said,  to  apprehend  that 
prince  Rupert,  with  a  squadron  of  the  king’s  ships, 
was  about  crossing  the  Atlantic,  to  secure  all  the 
English  American  possessions  for  Charles  the  Se¬ 
cond. 

Ayscue,  who  commanded  the  parliament’s  forces 
employed  on  this  expedition,  arrived  at  Barba¬ 
does  on  the  16th  of  October  1651,  and  succeed¬ 
ed  at  length  in  bringing  the  island  to  capitulate  :* 
But  this  was  not  effected  without  great  difficulty ; 
for  he  met  with  so  stout  a  resistance,  as  deter- 


*  Ayscue  agreed,  among  other  things,  that  the  government  should 
consist  of  a  governor,  council,  and  assembly,  according  to  the  an* 
cient  and  usual  custom  of  the  island.  The  assembly  to  be  chosen  by 
a  free  and  voluntary  election  of  the  freeholders  of  the  island  in  the 
several  parishes.  That  no  taxes,  customs,  imposts,  loans,  or  ex- 

Vol.  II. 


E 


3*  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

mined  his  employers  at  home  immediately  to  en¬ 
force  a  scheme  they  had  projected  a  short  time  be¬ 
fore,  of  altering  the  whole  system  of  the  Barba¬ 
dian  commerce,  by  prohibiting  by  an  act  of  the 
Commonwealth,  all  foreign  shipping  from  trading 
with  the  English  plantations;  and  not  permitting 
any  goods  to  be  imported  into  England,  or  any  of 
its  dependencies,  in  any  other  than  English  bot¬ 
toms  j  or  in  ships  of  that  European  nation  of  which 
the  merchandize  imported  was  the  genuine  growth 
and  manufacture.  And  thus  arose  the  famous  na¬ 
vigation  act  of  this  kingdom ;  for  immediately  af¬ 
ter  the  restoration,  its  provisions  were  adopted  by 
Charles  the  Second,  with  this  addition,  that  the 
master  and  three  fourths  of  the  mariners,  should 
also  be  English  subjects. 

Whatever  advantages  the  general  commerce  and 
navigation  of  England  may  have  derived  from  this 
celebrated  law,  it  must  be  allowed,  that  its  original 
framers  were  actuated  by  no  better  motives  (as  a 
great  writer*  hath  observed)  than  those  of  punishing 
the  planters,  and  clipping  the  wings  of  the  Dutch. 
The  inhabitants  of  Barbadoes,  justly  considering 
the  law  as  a  chastisement  inflicted  on  them  by  the 
commonwealth  for  their  loyalty  to  Charles  the  Se- 


cise,  should  be  laid,  nor  levy  made  on  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  this 
island,  without  their  consent  in  a  peneial  assembly  ;  and  that  all  laws 
that  had  been  made  by  general  assemblies,  not  repugnant  to  the  laws 
of  England,  should  be  good. 


*  Blackstone. 


35 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES. 

cond,  were  filled  with  amazement  and  indignation, 
on  finding  its  provisions  adopted  and  confirmed  on 
the  restoration  of  that  monarch.  By  the  regulations 
of  this  act,  and  the  establishment  of  the  internal 
duty  on  their  produce,  of  which  I  have  so  largely 
spoken,  they  thought  themselves  treated  with  a 
rigour  which  bordered  on  ingratitude,  and  they 
predicted  the  decline  of  their  population,  agricul¬ 
ture  and  wealth,  from  the  effect  of  those  mea¬ 
sures.  How  far  their  predictions  have  been  accom¬ 
plished,  a  comparative  state  of  the  island  at  diffe¬ 
rent  periods  will  demonstrate  :  with  which,  and  a 
few  miscellaneous  observations,  I  shall  dismiss  my 
present  account. 

Barbadoes  is  situated  in  13  degrees  10  minutes 
north  latitude,  and  in  longitude  59  degrees  west 
from  London.  It  is  about  twenty-one  miles  in 
length,  and  fourteen  in  breadth,  and  contains 
106,470  acres  of  land,  most  of  which  is  under 
cultivation.  The  soil  in  the  low  lands  is  black, 
somewhat  reddish  in  the  shallow  parts;  on  the 
hills  of  a  chalky  marl,  and  near  the  sea  generally 
sandy.  Of  this  variety  of  soil,  the  black  mould 
is  best  suited  for  the  cultivation  of  the  cane,  and, 
with  the  aid  of  manure,  has  given  as  great  returns 
of  sugar,  in  favourable  seasons,  as  any  in  the  West 
Indies,  the  prime  lands  of  St.  Kitt’s  excepted. 

That  the  soil  of  this  island  is,  to  a  great  degree, 
naturally  fertile,  we  must  necessarily  admit,  if  we 
give  credit  to  the  accounts  which  are  transmitted 


/ 


j6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

down  to  us,  of  its  ancient  population  and  opu¬ 
lence.  We  are  assured,  that  about  the  year  1670, 
Barbadoes  could  boast  of  fifty  thousand  white,  and 
upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  black’  inhabit¬ 
ants,  whose  labours,  it  is  said,  gave  employment 
to  sixty  thousand  tons  of  shipping.*  I  suspect  that 
this  account  is  much  exaggerated.  It  cannot  how¬ 
ever  be  doubted,  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  island 
have  decreased  with  a  rapidity  seldom  known  in 
any  other  country.  I  have  now  before  me  authen- 

*  The  earliest  planters  of  Barbadoes  were  sometimes  reproached 
with  the  guilt  of  forcing  or  decoying  into  slavery  the  Indians  of  the 
neighbouring  continent.  The  history  of  Inkle  and  Yarico,  which  the 
Spectator  has  recorded  for  the  detestation  of  mankind,  took  its  rise 
in  this  island;  but  happily  this  species  of  slavery  has  been  loBg  since 
abolished  :  and  perhaps,  such  of  my  readers  as  have  sympathized  with 
the  unfortunate  Yarico,  may  not  be  sorry  to  hear,  that  she  bore  her  mis¬ 
fortunes  with  greater  philosophy  than  they  have  hitherto  fancied.  The 
story  was  first  related  by  Ligon,  who  (after  praising  poor  Yarico’s  ex¬ 
cellent  complexion,  which,  he  says,  was  “  a  bright  bay and  her 
small  breasts  “  with  nipples  of  porphyrie”)  observes,  that,  “  she 
il  chanc’t  afterwards  to  be  with  child  by  a  Christian  servant,  and  be- 
(t  ing  very  great,  walked  down  to  a  woode,  in  which  was  a  pond  of 
“  water,  and  there,  by  the  side  of  the  pond,  brought  herselfe  a-bed, 
“  and  in  three  hours  came  home  with  the  child  in  her  arms,  a  lusty 

boy,  frolicke  and  lively.”  The  crime  of  Inkle  the  merchant,  how¬ 
ever,  admits  of  no  palliation ;  but  it  is  ridiculous  enough  to  hear 
Abbe  Raynal  (willing  to  improve  upon  Addison)  ascribe  to  it  an  in¬ 
tended  revolt  of  all  the  Negroes  in  Barbadoes,  who,  as  he  asserts, 
moved  by  indignation  at  Inkle’s  monstrous  cruelty,  vowed  with  one 
accord  the  destruction  of  all  the  Whites  ;  but  their  plot  was  disco¬ 
vered  the  night  before  it  was  to  have  been  carried  into  effect.  The 
Histoire  Pbilosophique  has  a  thousand  beauties ;  but  it  grieves  me  to 
say,  that  in  point  of  historical  accuracy,  it  i§  nearly  on  a  level  with  the 
History  of  Robinson  Crusoe ,  or  Tom  Thumb. 


37 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES. 

tic  returns  of  the  number  of  its  whites  in  1724, 
and  of  its  negroes  in  1753 :  the  former  consisted  of 
no  more  than  eighteen  thousand  two  hundred  and 
ninety-five,  the  latter  of  sixty-nine  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  seventy.  In  1786  the  numbers  were 
sixteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty-seven 
whites,  eight  hundred  and  thirty-eight  free  people 
of  colour,  and  sixty-two  thousand  one  hundred 
and  fifteen  negroes. 

It  appears  too,  that  the  annual  produce  of  this 
island  (particularly  sugar)  has  decreased  in  a  much 
greater  proportion  than  in  any  other  of  the  West 
Indian  colonies.  Postlethwayte  states  the  crop  of 
sugar,  in  1736,  at  22,769  hogsheads  of  13  cwt. 
which  is  equal  to  19,800  of  15  cwt.  and  the  au¬ 
thor  of  the  European  Settlements ,  published  in 
1761,  calculates  the  average  crop  at  25,000  hogs¬ 
heads.  As  the  author  first  quoted  gives  a  precise 
number,  it  is  probable  his  statement  was  grounded 
on  good  authority.  If  so,  the  island  has  fallen  off 
nearly  one  half  in  the  annual  growth  of  its  prin¬ 
cipal  staple.  On  an  average  of  eight  years  (from 
1740  to  1748)  the  exports  were  13,948  hogsheads 
of  sugar  of  15  cwt.  12,884  puncheons  of  rum 
of  100  gallons,  60  hogsheads  of  melasses,  4,667 
bags  of  ginger,  600  bags  of  cotton,  and  327 
gourds  of  aloes.  The  exports,  on  an  average  of 
1784,  1785,  and  1786,  had  fallen  to  9,554  hogs¬ 
heads  of  sugar,  5,448  puncheons  of  rum,  6,320 
bags  of  ginger,  8,331  bags  of  cotton ;  exclusive  of 


33  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

some  smaller  articles,  as  aloes,  sweetmeats,  &c. 
of  which  the  quantities  are  not  ascertained. 

That  the  dreadful  succession  of  hurricanes,  with 
Which  it  has  pleased  the  Almighty  to  visit  this, 
and  the  other  West  Indian  islands,  within  the  last 
twelve  years,  has  contributed  to  this  great  defalca¬ 
tion,  cannot  be  doubted.  The  capital  of  this  island 
was  scarce  risen  from  the  ashes  to  which  it  had 
been  reduced  by  two  dreadful  fires,  when  it  was 
torn  from  its  foundations,  and  the  whole  country 
made  a  scene  of  desolation,  by  the  storm  of  the 
10th  of  October  1780,  in  which  no  less  than  four 
thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty-six  of  the  inha¬ 
bitants  (blacks  and  whites)  miserably  perished  ;  and 
the  damage  to  the  country  was  computed  at 
<£.1,320,564  15s.  sterling. 

It  might  have  been  presumed,  however,  from 
the  favourable  seasons  which  have  been  experien¬ 
ced  for  the  last  three  or  four  years,  that  the  pros¬ 
pect  was  at  length  beginning  to  brighten ;  but  al¬ 
though,  since  the  failure  of  their  sugar  plantations, 
the  inhabitants  have  found  some  resource  in  the 
cultivation  of  cotton,  it  does  not  seem  probable, 
that  any  encouragement  is  capable  of  ever  restoring 
this  island  to  its  ancient  splendor  and  opulence; 
unless  it  be  relieved  from  the  heavy  imposition  of 
four  and  a  half  per  cent,  on  their  exported  pro¬ 
duce,  of  the  origin  of  which  I  have  so  largely 
treated.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  an  enlightened  mi¬ 
nister  will  one  day  arise,  who  will  have  the  cou- 


WEST  INDIES. 


39 


CHAP.  I.] 

rage  and  virtue  to  signify  to  the  sovereign,  that  it 
is  neither  becoming  the  dignity,  nor  consistent 
with  the  character  of  the  common  father  of  all  his 
subjects,  to  insist  on  a  tribute  from  a  part  of  them, 
which,  though  nominally  granted  by  themselves, 
was  assuredly  obtained  by  fraud  and  oppression, 
and  of  which  the  continuance  is  a  check  to  honest 
industry,  and  perhaps  the  immediate  cause  of  the 
decline  of  this  beautiful  and  once  valuable  colony. 

Barbadoes  is  divided  into  five  districts,  and  ele¬ 
ven  parishes ;  and  contains  four  towns,  Bridge¬ 
town,  Ostins  or  Charles  town,  St.  James’s  (for¬ 
merly  called  The  Hole),  and  Speight’s  town. 
Bridge  town,  the  capital,  before  it  was  destroyed 
by  the  fires  of  1766,  consisted  of  about  fifteen 
hundred  houses,  which  were  mostly  built  of  brick; 
and  it  is  still  the  seat  of  government,  and  may  be 
called  the  chief  residence  of  the  governor,  who  is 
provided  with  a  country  villa  called  Pilgrims,  si¬ 
tuated  within  a  mile  of  it:  his  salary  was  raised 
by  queen  Anne  from  twelve  hundred  to  two  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  per  annum,  the  whole  of  which  is 
paid  out  of  the  exchequer,  and  charged  to  the  ac¬ 
count  of  the  four  and  a  half  per  cent.  duty.  The 
form  of  the  government  of  this  island  so  very 
nearly  resembles  that  of  Jamaica,  which  has  alrea¬ 
dy  been  described,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter 
into  detail,  except  to  observe,  that  the  council  is 
composed  of  twelve  members,  and  the  assembly 
of  twenty-two.  The  most  important  variation  re¬ 
spects  the  court  of  chancery,  which  in  Barbadoes 


40 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

is  constituted  of  the  governor  and  council ,  where¬ 
as  in  Jamaica  the  governor  is  sole  chancellor.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  Barbadoes,  the  governor  sits  in 
council,  even  when  the  latter  are  acting  in  a  legis¬ 
lative  capacity.  This,  in  Jamaica,  would  be  con¬ 
sidered  improper  and  unconstitutional.  It  may  also 
be  observed,  that  the  courts  of  grand  sessions, 
common  pleas,  and  exchequer,  in  Barbadoes,  are 
distinct  from  each  other,  and  not,  as  in  Jamaica, 
united  and  blended  in  one  supreme  court  of  judica¬ 
ture. 

I  shall  close  my  account  of  Barbadoes  with  the 
following  authentic  documents : 
CHAPTER  II. 

GRENADA 

AND  ITS  DEPENDENCIES. 

First  discovery,  name,  and  inhabitants. — French  invasion 
and  establishment  in  1650. — War  with,  and  extermina¬ 
tion  of  the  natives. — The  island  and  its  dependencies 
conveyed  to  the  Count  de  Cer iliac. — Misconduct  and 
punishment  of  the  deputy -governor. — The  colony  re¬ 
verts  to  the  crown  of  France. — State  of  the  island  in 
1700. — And  again  in  1762,  when  captured  by  the  Eng¬ 
lish. — Stipulations  in  favour  of  the  French  inhabitants. 
— First  measures  of  the  British  government . — Claim 
of  the  crown  to  levy  a  duty  of  four  and  a  half  per  cent, 
on  produce  exported. — Arguments  for  and  objections 
against  the  measure. — Decision  of  the  court  of  King's 
Bench  on  this  important  question. — Strictures  on  some 
positions  advanced  by  the  lord  chief  justice  on  this  occa¬ 
sion. — Transactions  within  the  colony. — Royal  instruc¬ 
tions  in  favour  of  the  Roman  Catholic  capitulants. — In¬ 
ternal  dissentions. — Defenceless  state. — French  invasion 
in  1779. — Brave  defence  of  the  garrison. — Uncondi¬ 
tional  surrender.  —  Hardships  exercised  towards  the 
English  planters  and  their  creditors.-— -Redress  given  by 
the  court  of  France. — Grenada,  kc.  restored  to  Great 
Britain  by  the  peace  of  1783. — Present  stale  of  the  co¬ 
lony  in  respect  to  cultivation,  productions,  and  exports ; 
government  and  population.  Postcript.  Appendix. 

Grenada  was  discovered  by,  and  received 
its  name  from,  Christopher  Columbus,  in  his 
third  voyage,  in  the  year  1498.  He  found  it  pos- 


44 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

sessed  by  a  numerous  and  warlike  people,  amongst 
whom  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Spaniards  ever 
attempted  to  force  a  settlement.  They  had  a  no¬ 
bler  prize  to  contend  for  on  the  continent,  and  a 
century  elapsed,  before  the  other  nations  of  Europe 
considered  the  regions  of  the  New  World  as  coun¬ 
tries,  wherein  all  men  might  seize  on  what  suited' 
their  convenience,  without  any  regard  to  the  pro¬ 
per  inhabitants.  Thus  the  Charaibes  of  Grenada 
happily  remained  in  peaceful  obscurity  until  the 
year  1650,  when  the  avarice  and  ambition  of  a 
restless  individual  devoted  them  to  destruction. 

This  person  was  Du  Parquet,  the  trench  gover¬ 
nor  of  Martinico,  nephew  and  heir  of  Besnambuc, 
of  whom  memorable  mention  is  made  in  the  annals 
of  St.  Christopher.  Notwithstanding  that  the 
French  establishment  in  Martinico  was  itself  of 
recent  date,  and  that  a  great  part  of  that  island 
still  remained  uncultivated;  and  although  another 
establishment  was,  at  the  same  time,  begun  by  the 
same  nation,  in  the  large  and  fertile  island  of  Gua- 
daloupe,  yet  such  was  the  rapaciousness  of  this 
people,  that  upwards  of  two  hundred  hardy  ruffians 
were  easily  collected,  by  Du  Parquet’s  encourage¬ 
ment,  for  an  attempt  on  Grenada;  and  it  is  appa¬ 
rent  from  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  prepa¬ 
rations,  that  it  was  considered  an  enterprize  of  dif¬ 
ficulty  and  danger. 

The  history  of  this  expedition,  which  took  place 
in  June  1650,  is  related  at  large  by  Father  du  Ter- 


WEST  INDIES. 


45 


CHAP.  II.] 

tre,  whose  account  exhibits  such  a  monstrous  mix¬ 
ture  of  fanaticism  and  knavery  in  the  conduct  of 
its  leaders,  as  cannot  be  contemplated  without  in¬ 
dignation  and  horror.  Although  it  is  evident,  that 
the  French  had  not  the  smallest  justifiable  pretence 
for  this  invasion,  yet  we  find  the  commanders  ad¬ 
ministering  the  holy  sacrament,  in  the  most  solemn 
manner,  to  all  the  soldiers  on  their  embarkation; 
and  again,  on  their  landing,  Du  Parquet,  causing 
a  Cross  to  be  erected,  compelled  them  to  kneel 
down  before  it,  and  join  in  devout  prayer  to  Al¬ 
mighty  God,  for  success  to  their  enterprize. 

This  commander  seems,  however,  to  have  had  a 
few  scruples  of  conscience  concerning  the  justice 
of  his  proceedings;  for,  having  been  received  and 
entertained  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  cordiality 
by  the  natives,  (contrary  to  his  expectations,  and 
perhaps,  to  his  wishes),  he  thought  it  necessary  to 
affect  some  little  regard  to  moderation,  by  pretend¬ 
ing  to  open  a  treaty  with  the  chief  of  the  Charaibes 
for  the  purchase  of  the  country.  He  gave  the  na¬ 
tives  (observes  Du  Tertre)  some  knives  and  hatch¬ 
ets,  and  a  large  quantity  of  glass  beads,  besides 
two  bottles  of  brandy  for  the  chief  himself;  and 
thus  (continues  he)  was  the  island  fairly  ceded  to 
the  French  nation  by  the  natives  themselves  in  law¬ 
ful  purchase !  After  this  notable  transaction,  it  it 
not  wonderful  that  the  French  should  consider  the 
refusal  of  the  poor  savages  to  confirm  the  agree¬ 
ment,  as  contumacy  and  rebellion. 


46 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

Da  Parquet  having  thus  established  a  colony  in 
Grenada,  and  built  a  fort  for  its  protection,  left  the 
government  of  the  island  to  a  kinsman,  named  Le 
Compte,  a  man,  according  to  Du  Tertre,  who  pos¬ 
sessed  very  singular  talents  for  government  ,•  and 
was  remarkable  for  clemency  and  humanity.  We 
find  this  gentleman,  however,  eight  months  after¬ 
wards,  engaged  in  a  most  bloody  war  with  the  Cha- 
raibes;  in  the  prosecution  of  which  he  authorised 
such  acts  of  cruelty,  as  furnish  a  portrait  of  him  ve¬ 
ry  different  from  that  which  the  historian  has  ex- 

j 

hibited.  On  receiving  news  of  the  revolt  of  the 
natives,  Du  Parquet  sent  a  reinforcement  of  three 
hundred  men  from  Martinico,  with  orders  to  ex¬ 
tirpate  the  natives  altogether;  but  Le  Compte 
seems  not  to  have  wanted  any  incitement  to  acts  of 
barbarity;  for  Du  Tertre  admits,  that  he  had  already 
proceeded  to  murder,  without  mercy,  every  Cha- 
raibe  that  fell  into  his  hands;  not  sparing  even  the 
women  and  children. 

Of  the  manner  in  which  this  humane  and  ac¬ 
complished  commander,  and  his  civilized  followers, 
conducted  hostilities  against  these  miserable  people, 
we  may  form  an  idea,  from  a  circumstance  that  oc¬ 
curred  in  one  of  their  expeditions,  ot  which  the 
reverend  historian  concludes  his  narrative  as  fol¬ 
lows  :  Forty  of  the  Charaibes  were  massacred  on 
the  spot.  About  forty  others,  who  had  escaped 
the  sword,  ran  towards  a  precipice,  from  whence 
they  cast  themselves  headlong  into  the  sea,  and 
miserably  perished.  A  beautiful  young  girl  of 


WEST  INDIES. 


47 


CHAP.  II.] 

twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  age,  who  was  taken 
alive,  became  the  object  of  dispute  between  two 
of  our  officers,  each  of  them  claiming  her  as  his 
lawful  prize;  a  third  coming  up,  put  an  end  to  the 
contest,  by  shooting  the  girl  through  the  head. 
The  place  from  which  these  barbarians  threw  them¬ 
selves  into  the  sea,  has  been  called  ever  since  It 
Morne  des  Sauteurs  *  Our  people  (having  lost 
but  one  man  in  the  expedition)  proceeded  in  the 
next  place  to  set  fire  to  the  cottages,  and  root  up 
the  provisions  of  the  savages,  and,  having  destroy¬ 
ed,  or  taken  away,  every  thing  belonging  to  them, 
returned  in  high  spirits ,”  (hien  joyeux.J 

By  a  series  of  such  enormities,  the  whole  race  of 
Charaibes  that  possessed  Grenada  in  1650,  was 
speedily  exterminated,  and  the  French,  having  in 
this  manner  butchered  ail  the  natives,  proceeded, 
in  the  next  place,  to  massacre  each  other. 

The  particulars  of  this  civil  contest  may,  with¬ 
out  injury  to  my  readers  be  omitted.  I  shall  there¬ 
fore  only  observe,  that  the  supreme  authority  of  Du 
Parquet  and  his  lieutenant,  was  at  length  establish¬ 
ed  in  Grenada;  but  the  expense  which  had  attend¬ 
ed  the  plantation  from  its  outset,  and  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  the  force  which  Du  Parquet  had  been 
compelled  to  furnish  in  support  of  his  authority, 
had  so  greatly  injured  his  fortune,  as  to  induce  him 
to  look  out  for  a  purchaser  of  all  his  rights  and 


z' 


*  Leaper’s  Hill.' 


43  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

possessions  in  this  island  and  its  dependencies.  In 
1656  such  a  purchaser  offered  in  the  count  de  Ce¬ 
rillac,  to  whom  the  whole  was  conveyed  for  30, OCX) 
crowns. 

The  conduct  of  Cerillac  towards  the  inhabitants 
of  his  newly  acquired  dominion  was  highly  injudi¬ 
cious  and  oppressive.  He  appointed  a  governor  of 
so  arrogant  and  rapacious  a  disposition,  and  sup¬ 
ported  him  in  his  extortions  with  such  obstinacy, 
as  to  compel  the  most  respectable  of  the  settlers  to 
quit  the  country  and  seek  for  safety  under  a  milder 
government.  At  length  the  people  that  remained 
took  the  administration  of  justice  into  their  own 
hands;  by  seizing  on  the  person  of  the  governor, 
and  bringing  him  to  a  public  trial.  The  criminal 
was  condemned  to  be  hanged:  but  he  pleaded  no¬ 
ble  birth,  and  demanded  the  honour  of  decollation. 
His  request  would  have  been  granted,  but  unluck¬ 
ily  an  expert  executioner  in  the  business  of  behead¬ 
ing  could  not  readily  be  found;  the  judges  there¬ 
fore  compounded  the  matter  with  his  excellency, 
by  consenting  that  he  should  be  shot,  and  he  suffer¬ 
ed  in  that  mode  with  great  composure. 

Some  years  after  this,  Monsieur  de  Cerillac,  the 
proprietor,  receiving,  as  it  may  be  supposed,  but 
little  profit  from  his  capital,  conveyed  all  his  rights 
and  interests  in  Grenada,  &c.  to  the  French  West 
Indian  company;  whose  charter  being  abolished  in 
1674,  the  island  from  thenceforward  became  vested 
in  the  crown  of  France. 


49 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

Under  the  various  revolutions  and  calamities 
which  had  thus  attended  this  unfortunate  planta¬ 
tion,  it  may  well  be  imagined,  that  cultivation  had 
made  but  little  progress  in  it;  but  although  order 
and  submission  were  at  length  introduced  by  the 
establishment  of  the  royal  authority,  various  causes 
concurred  to  keep  the  colony  in  a  state  of  poverty 
and  depression  for  many  years  afterwards.  Even 
so  late  as  1700,  if  Raynal  has  been  rightly  inform¬ 
ed,  the  island  contained  no  more  than  251  whites 
and  525  blacks;  who  were  employed  on  three  plan¬ 
tations  of  sugar,  and  fifty-two  of  indigo. 

After  the  peace  of  Utrecht,  the  government  of 
France  began  to  turn  its  attention  towards  her 
West  Indian  possessions.  Grenada  however,  for 
many  years,  partook  less  of  its  care  than  the  rest. 
It  had  no  constant  correspondence  with  the  mother 
country:  some  oppressive  regulations  of  the  far- 
mers-general  ruined  the  cultivation  of  one  of  its 
staples,  tobacco:  and  the  planters  had  not  the 
means  of  obtaining  a  supply  of  negroes  from  Afri¬ 
ca,  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  cultivating  sugar  to 
any  extent.  These  inconveniencies  led  them  into 
a  smuggling  intercourse  with  the  Dutch :  a  re¬ 
source  which  at  length  changed  their  circumstances 
for  the  better;  increased  their  numbers,  and  occasi¬ 
oned  a  great  part  of  the  country  to  be  settled,  in¬ 
somuch  that  when,  in  the  year  1762,  the  fortune 
of  war  made  the  English  masters  of  this  and  the 
rest  of  the  French  Charaibean  islands,  Grenada  and 

the  Grenadines  are  said  to  have  vielded  annually, 

«  • 

Vol.  II. 


G 


Jo  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

in  clayed  and  muscovado  sugar,  a  quantity  equal  to 
about  11,000  hogsheads  of  muscovado  of  15  cwt. 
each,  and  about  27,OOOlbs.  of  indigo. 

Grenada  surrendered  on  capitulation  in  February 
1762,  and  with  its  dependencies,  was  finally  ceded 
to  Great  Britain,  by  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace  at 
Paris  on  the  10th  of  February  1763  ;  St.  Lucea  be¬ 
ing  restored  at  the  same  time  to  France.  The 
chief  stipulations  in  favour  of  the  inhabitants,  as 
well  by  the  treaty,  as  by  the  articles  of  capitula¬ 
tion,  were  these;  1st.  That  as  they  would  become 
by  their  surrender,  subjects  of  Great  Britain,  they 
should  enjoy  their  properties  and  privileges,  and 
pay  taxes,  in  like  manner'  as  the  rest  of  his  majes¬ 
ty's  subjects  of  the  other  British  Leeward  Islands. 
2dly.  With  respect  to  religion,  they  were  put  on 
the  same  footing  as  the  inhabitants  of  Canada,  viz. 
liberty  was  given  them  to  exercise  it  according  to 
the  rights  of  the  Romish  church,  as  far  as  the  lazvs 
of  Great  Britain  permitted.  3dly.  Such  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  Grenada,  as  chose  to  quit  the  island, 
should  have  liberty  so  to  do,  and  eighteen  months 
should  be  allowed  them  to  dispose  of  their  effects. 

The  island  and  its  dependencies  being  thus  be¬ 
come  a  British  colony,  one  of  the  first  measures  of 
government  was  to  issue  a  proclamation  under  the 
great  seal,  bearing  date  the  7th  of  October  1763, 
wherein,  amongst  other  things,  it  is  declared,  “  that 
u  all  persons  inhabiting  in,  or  resorting  to,  the 
*c  island  of  Grenada,  might  confide  in  the  roval 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  5* 

“  protection  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  benefit  of  the 
“  laws  of  England,  with  the  right  of  appeal  to  the 
“  king  in  council,  as  fully  as  the  inhabitants  of  the 
“  other  British  colonies  in  America,  under  the 
“  king’s  immediate  government.” — It  also  sets 
forth,  “  that  the  king,  by  letters  patent  under  the 
“  great  seal,  had  given  express  power  and  direction 
“  to  the  governor,  as  soon  as  the  state  and  circum- 
“  stances  of  the  colony  would  admit  thereof,  with 
t£  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  council,  and  the  re- 
“  presentatives  of  the  people,  to  make,  constitute, 
“  and  ordain  laws,  statutes,  and  ordinances  for  the 
“  good  government  thereof,  as  near  as  may  be 
(S  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  England,  and  under  such 

regulations  and  restrictions  as  are  used  in  the 
“  other  British  colonies.” 

This  proclamation  was  followed  by  another,  da¬ 
ted  the  26th  of  March  1764,  inviting  purchasers 
upon  certain  terms  and  conditions. 

The  governor  thus  said  to  have  been  appointed, 
was  general  Melville,  whose  commission  however 
did  not  bear  date  until  the  9th  of  April  1764,  and 
the  assembly  which  he  was  directed  to  summon, 
met  for  the  first  time  in  1765;  previous  to  which, 
the  British  inhabitants  were  irresistibly  called  to  the 
discussion  of  the  great  constitutional  question ;  of 
which  it  is  proper  I  should  now  give  some  account. 

The  question  arose  from  the  information,  that 
the  crown,  conceiving  itself  entitled  by  the  terms 


52  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  uu 

of  the  capitulation  to  the  duty  of  four  and  an  half 
per  cent,  upon  all  produce  exported  from  the  new¬ 
ly  ceded  islands,  as  paid  at  Barbadoes,  & c.  had  is¬ 
sued  letters  patent,  bearing  date  the  20th  July 
1764,  ordering  and  directing,  by  virtue  of  the  pre¬ 
rogative  royal,  that  from  and  after  the  29th  of  Sep¬ 
tember,  then  next  ensuing,  such  duty  or  import  in 
specie,  should  be  levied  in  Grenada;  in  lieu  of  all 
customs  and  duties  formerly  paid  to  the  French 
king. 

We  have  seen,  in  the  history  of  Barbadoes,  in 
what  manner  the  inhabitants  of  that  island  became 
subject  to  the  duty  in  question;  and  to  what  pur¬ 
poses  the  money  was  expressly  stipulated  to  be  ap¬ 
plied;  but  unjustifiable  as  were  the  means  by  which 
that  imposition  was  originally  established  in  Barba¬ 
does,  the  grant  was,  apparently,  the  grant  of  the 
people  themselves,  by  their  representatives  in  their 
legislative  capacity.  Even  Charles  the  lid.  in 
whose  reign  the  grant  passed,  though  a  rapacious 
and  unprincipled  monarch,  did  not  openly  claim  the 
right  of  laying  taxes  by  his  own  authority  in  a  co¬ 
lony  which  had  an  assembly  of  its  own,  competent 
to  that  purpose.  The  king  was  ready  enough  to 
over-awe,  or  to  corrupt  the  members  which  com¬ 
posed  that  assembly;  but  he  left  them  the  form  and 
semblance  at  least,  of  a  free  government. 

In  defence  of  the  present  measure  it  was  urged, 
that  Grenada  being  a  conquered  country,  the  king 
was  invested  with  the  power  of  putting  the  inha- 


WEST  INDIES. 


53 


6HAP.  II.] 

bitants  under  what  form  of  government  he  thought 
best;  that  he  might  have  granted  them  what  terms 
of  capitulation,  and  have  concluded  what  articles  of 
peace  with  them  he  saw  fit;  and  further,  that  the 
assurance  to  the  inhabitants  of  Grenada,  in  the  ar¬ 
ticles  of  capitulation,  that  they  should  enjoy  their 
properties  and  privileges  in  like  manner  as  the 
other  his  majesty’s  subjects  in  the  British  Leeward 
Islands,  necessarily  implied,  that  they  were  bound 
to  submit  to  the  same  consequences  of  their  being 
subjects  as  were  submitted  to  by  the  inhabitants  of 
those  islands;  one  of  which  was  the  payment  of 
the  duty  in  question.  It  was  said  therefore,  that 
the  demand  of  this  duty  was  most  reasonable,  equi¬ 
table  and  political;  for  that  it  was  only  putting  Gre¬ 
nada,  as  to  duties,  on  the  same  footing  with  all  the; 
British  Leeward  Islands.  If  Grenada  paid  more, 
it  would  be  detrimental  to  her,  if  less,  it  would  be 
detrimental  to  the  other  Leeward  islands. 

On  the  other  side,  it  was  contended,  that  the 
letters  patent  were  void  on  two  points,  the  first 
was,  “  that  although  they  had  been  granted  before 
the  proclamation  of  the  7th  of  October  1763,  yet 
the  king  could  not  exercise  such  a  legislative  pow¬ 
er  over  a  conquered  country.”  The  second  point 
was,  ec  that  although  the  king  had  sufficient  power 
and  authority,  before  the  7th  of  October  1763,  to 
do  such  a  legislative  act,  he  had  divested  himself  of 
such  authority  previous  to  the  letters  patent  of  the 
20th  of  July  1764.” 


54 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

The  crown,  however,  persisting  in  its  claim,  and 
the  inhabitants  in  opposing  it,  issue  was  joined  on 
the  arguments  that  I  have  stated,  and  the  question 
was  at  length  referred  to  a  solemn  adjudication  be¬ 
fore  the  judges  of  the  court  of  King’s  Bench  in 
England.* 

The  case  was  elaborately  argued  in  Westminster- 
hall,  four  several  times ;  and  in  Michaelmas  term 
1774,  lord  chief  justice  Mansfield  pronounced 
judgment,  against  the  crown .  The  consequence 
was,  that  the  duty  in  question  was  abolished  not 
only  in  Grenada,  but  also  in  the  ceded  islands  of 
Dominica,  St.  Vincent  and  Tobago. 

It  may  be  reasonably  supposed,  that  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  all  these  islands  had  sufficient  cause  for  ex¬ 
ultation  at  a  verdict  so  favourable  to  their  interests ; 
but  the  circumstances  on  which  the  decision  was 
founded,  and  the  doctrines  which  were  promul¬ 
gated  along  with  it,  became  the  subject  of  much 
animadversion;  and  indeed  (if  I  may  obtrude  my 
own  opinion  in  such  a  case)  they  appear  to  me  to 
be  of  a  dangerous  and  unconstitutional  tendency. 

The  noble  and  venerable  judge  who  pronounced 
the  opinion  of  the  court,  rested  the  determination 
solely  on  the  circumstance,  that  the  proclamations 
of  October  1763,  and  March  1764,  were  of  prior 
date  to  the  letters  patent ;  observing,  that  the  king 


*  The  case  is  related  at  large  in  Cowper’s  Reports. 


55 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

had  precluded  himself  from  the  exercise  of  legisla¬ 
tive  authority  over  Grenada,  before  the  letters  pa¬ 
tent  were  issued.  ‘s  Through  inattention,  he  said, 
of  the  king’s  servants,  in  inverting  the  order  in 
which  the  instruments  should  have  passed,  the  last 
act  was  contradictory  to,  and  a  violation  of  the  firsts 
and  on  that  account  null  and  void.”  But,  although 
the  noble  lord  confined  the  mere  legal  question  to 
a  narrow  compass,  he  judged  it  necessary,  at  the 
same  time,  to  enter  on  a  wide  and  extensive  field 
of  discussion,  in  support  of  the  regal  authority  over 
conquered  countries  5  maintaining,  “  that  it  is  left 
to  the  king  to  grant  or  refuse  a  capitulation; — if 
he  refuses,  and  puts  the  inhabitants  to  the  sword , 
or  otherwise  exterminates  them ,  all  the  lands  be¬ 
long  to  himself.  If  he  receives  the  inhabitants  un- 
der  his  protection,  and  grants  them  their  property, 
he  has  a  power  to  fix  such  terms  and  conditions 
as  he  thinks  proper.  He  may  (said  the  noble 
judge)  yield  up  the  conquest,  or  retain  it,  on  zohat 
terms  he  pleases ,  and  change  part,  or  the  whole 
of  the  law,  or  political  form  of  its  government, 
as  he  sees  best”  In  reply  to  an  observation,  that 
no  adjudged  case,  in  point,  had  been  adduced,  the 
noble  lord  declared,  that  this  was  not  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at,  “  inasmuch,  as  no  question  was  ever 
started  before  but,  that  the  king  has  a  right  to  a  le¬ 
gislative  authority  over  a  conquered  country;”  and 
he  quoted  an  opinion  of  the  crown  lawyers  in  1722, 
in  respect  of  Jamaica.  The  assembly  of  that  island 
being  refractory,  it  was  referred  to  Sir  Philip  Y orke 
and  Sir  Clement  Wearge,  to  know  <c  what  could  be 


56  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

done  if  the  assembly  should  obstinately  continue  to 
withhold  all  the  usual  supplies.”  They  reported, 
that  “  if  Jamaica  was  still  to  be  considered  as  a 
conquered  island,  the  king  had  a  right  to  levy  taxes 
upon  the  inhabitants;  but  if  it  was  to  be  considered 
in  the  same  light  as  ike  other  colonies,  no  tax  could 
be  imposed  on  the  inhabitants  but  by  an  assembly 
of  the  island,  or  by  an  act  of  parliament .” 

It  is  impossible,  I  think,  not  to  perceive,  through¬ 
out  these,  and  other  parts  of  the  learned  judge’s 
argument,  a  certain  degree  of  bias  arising  from  the 
unhappy  dissentions  which,  about  that  period, 
broke  out  into  a  civil  war  between  Great  Britain 
and  her  colonies ;  in  the  progress  of  which,  it  is  be¬ 
lieved,  this  noble  person  distinguished  himself  as 
an  active  partizan,  and  a  powerful  advocate  for  the 
unconditional  supremacy  of  the  mother-country.  I 
might  otherwise  be  chargeable  with  great  arrogance 
in  presuming  to  differ  from  such  weight  of  authori¬ 
ty  ;  but,  surely,  it  will  be  permitted  me  to  examine 
the  doctrine  maintained  on  this  occasion,  by  the 
test  of  those  cases,  which  the  noble  judge  himself 
adduced  in  its  support.  In  such  an  examination, 
plain  argument  and  common  sense  may  supply  the 
subtleties  of  legal  refinement,  and  the  want  of  pro¬ 
fessional  learning. 

The  cases  chiefly  relied  on  by  the  learned  judge, 
were  those  of  Ireland,  Wales,  Berwick  and  New 
York;  in  all  which  places  it  was  asserted,  that  the 
king,  after  their  conquest,  had,  of  his  own  autho- 


57 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

rity,  exercised  the  powers  of  legislature,  by  in¬ 
troducing  an  alteration  of  their  former  laws,  and 
establishing  a  new  system  of  government  over  the 
inhabitants.  cc  No  man  (observed  his  lordship,  in 
the  case  of  Ireland)  ever  said,  that  the  change  in 
the  laws  of  that  country  was  made  by  the  parlia¬ 
ment  of  England :  no  man  ever  said  the  crown 
could  not  do  it.” 

With  the  utmost  deference,  however,  to  the 
sentiments  of  this  great  and  enlightened  lawyer, 
I  presume  to  think,  that  the  question  was  not  sim¬ 
ply,  whether  the  crown  alone,  or  the  parliament 
of  England  had  the  right  of  exercising  the  autho¬ 
rity  contended  for? — I  will  even  admit  that  the  in¬ 
terposition  of  parliament  was  unnecessary.  Still, 
however,  the  main  question  remains  to  be  answer¬ 
ed,  which  is.  To  what  extent  may  the  royal  pre¬ 
rogative  in  such  cases  he  exerted?  Did  the  noble 

c> 

judge  mean  to  assert,  that  conquest  destroys  all 
the  rights  of  the  conquered,  and  that  the  king, 
in  changing  their  laws  and  form  of  government, 
has  a  right  to  prescribe  to  them,  not.  merely  the 
English  constitutions — but  any  other  system  he 
thinks  best?  If  such  was  the  opinion,  it  may  be  af¬ 
firmed,  that  the  cases  which  his  lordship  adduced  in 
support  of  his  argument  warrant  no  such  conclu¬ 
sion. 

The  first  case  was  that  of  Ireland.  “  The  fuct, 
says  the  noble  lord,  comes  out  clearly  to  be,  that 
Ireland  received  ike  laws  of  England  by  the  char- 

Vol.  IE  h 


|8  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

ters  and  commands  of  Henry  II.  king  John,  and 
Henry  III.” 

Of  Wales,  the  noble  lord  observes,  «  that  the 
statute  of  Wales  (12  Edward  I.)  is  certainly  no 
more  than  regulations ,  made  by  the  king  in  his 
council ,  for  the  government  of  Wales,  and  that  the 
king  governed  it  as  a  conquest  S'  but  let  us  hear, 
on  this  subject,  the  learned  judge  Blackstone. 
This  territory,  observes  Blackstone,  being  then 
entirely  re-annexed  (by  a  kind  of  feodal  resump¬ 
tion)  to  the  dominion  of  the  crown  of  England,  or, 
as  the  statute  of  Rutland  expresses  it  terra ,  Walliae 
cum  incolis  suis,  prius  rcgi  jure  feodali  subjecta, 
(of  which  homage  was  the  sign),  jam  in  proprie- 
tatis  dominium  totaliter  et  cum  integritate  conversa 
est,  et  coronae  regni  Angliac  tanquam  pars  corporis 
ejusdcm  annexa  ct  unita.  But  the  finishing  stroke 
to  their  independency,  was  given  by  the  statute 
27  Henry  VIII.  c.  26,  which  at  the  same  time  gave 
the  utmost  advancement  to  their  civil  prosperity, 
by  admitting  them  to  a  thorough  communication  of 
laws  with  the  subjects  of  England.  Thus  were 
this  brave  people  gradually  conquered  into  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  true  liberty ;  being  insensibly  put  upon 
the  same  footing ,  and  made  fellow  citizens  with 
their  conquerors." 

Another  case  was  that  of  Berwick,  which,  ob¬ 
served  the  noble  lord,  “  after  the  conquest  of  it, 
was  governed  by  charters  from  the  crown,  without 
the  interposition  of  Parliament,  till  the  reign  -  of 


59 


chap,  if.]  WEST  INDIES. 

James  I.”  The  noble  judge  would  have  stated  this 
case  more  fairly,  had  he  said,  that  Edward  I.  at  the 
request  of  the  inhabitants ,  confirmed  to  them  the 
enjoyment  of  their  ancient  laws;  but,  that  “  its 
constitution  was  put  on  an  English  footing  by  a 
charter  of  king  James.”  These  are  the  very 
words  of  Blackstone. 

The  case  next  quoted  by  the  learned  judge  was 
that  of  New  York,  which  was  conquered  from  the 
Dutch  in  1664,  and  like  Wales,  remained  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  most  of  its  former  inhabitants.  “  King 
Charles  II.  (observes  the  noble  judge)  changed  the 
form  of  their  constitution  and  political  govern¬ 
ment  ;  by  granting  it  to  the  duke  of  York ,  to  hold 
of  his  crown  under  all  the  regulations  contained  in 
the  letters  patent." — So  far  is  true;  but  what  fol¬ 
lowed?  This  duke  of  York  (afterwards  James  II.) 
was  a  man,  whose  principles  of  government  were  in 
the  highest  degree  repugnant  and  inimical  to  those 
of  the  English  constitution.  Accordingly,  he  at¬ 
tempted  at  first,  to  introduce  into  the  newly  acqui¬ 
red  country,  a  system  little  consonant  to  British 
freedom ;  but  he  was  disappointed  and  defeated. 
He  was  compelled,  much  against  his  inclination,  to 
allow  the  people  to  choose  deputies  to  represent 
them  in  the  legislature ;  and  these  deputies  actual¬ 
ly  voted,  “  that  all  the  ordinances  which  had  been 
made  by  the  governor  and  council  before  the  peo¬ 
ple  were  admitted  to  a  share  in  the  legislature, 
were  invalid,  because  they  were  passed  in  a  manner 
Repugnant  to  the  constitution  of  England . 


6o  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  in. 

From  this  recital,  it  is  I  think  evident,  that  the 
noble  and  learned  judge  mistook  the  gist  of  the 
question:  or  rather  confounded  together  two  things 
which  are  totally  distinct  and  repugnant  in  then 
nature  ;  for  he  appears  to  have  considered  the  pre¬ 
rogative  in  the  king,  of  extending  to  his  newly  ac¬ 
quired  subjects  the  benefits  of  the  English  consti¬ 
tution,  as  equivalent  to  the  right  of  ruling  them  by 
whatever  constitution  or  system  of  government  he 
pleases;  or,  by  none  at  all. 

It  would  seem  then,  that  if  the  cases  which  have 
been  adduced  prove  any  thing,  they  prove  that  the 
crown  neither  has  prescribed,  nor  could  prescribe, 
any  form  of  government  incompatible  with  the 
principles  of  the  British  constitution,  to  any  colony 
or  territory  whatever,  whether  acquired  by  con¬ 
quest  or  settlement; — and  good  authorities  are  not 
wanting  in  support  of  this  doctrine.  “  The  king 
of  Great  Britain  (says  an  excellent  writer*)  although 
at  the  head  of  a  free  state,  may,  in  his  own  right 
hold  other  states,  under  a  form  of  government 
that  is  not  free  j  as  he  does,  for  instance,  the  states 
of  the  electorate  of  Hanover.  He  may  too,  even 
as  king  of  Great  Britain,  by  virtue  of  his  preroga¬ 
tive,  and  as  generalissimo  of  the  empire,  hold  a 
conquered  state  (for  the  time  being)  under  a  form 
of  government  that  is  not  free ;  that  is,  under  mi¬ 
litary  Jaw:  but  in  the  instant  that  such  conquered 
state  is,  by  treaty  of  peace,  or  otherwise,  ceded 


CHAP.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  6 1 

to  the  crown  of  Great  Britain,  in  that  instant  it 
imbibes  the  spirit  of  the  constitution,  it  is  natura¬ 
lized;  it  is  assimilated  to  the  government,  it  is  go¬ 
vernable  and  to  be  governed  by,  and  under  all  those 
powers  with  which  the  governing  power  of  king, 
lords,  and  commons,  is  invested  by  the  constitution  ; 
but  it  is  not  governable,  neither  is  to  be  govern¬ 
ed,  by  any  powers,  which  the  governing  power  of 
king,  lords,  and  commons,  does  not  possess  from 
the  constitution:  as  for  example,  it  cannot  be  go¬ 
verned  on  the  principles  of  slavery;  because,  the 
governing  power  of  king,  lords,  and  commons,  is 
appointed  by  the  constitution  to  govern  on  the 
principles  of  liberty.”  Surely,  it  is  a  proposition  ab¬ 
surd  and  monstrous  on  the  very  face  of  it,  to  say, 
that  a  limited  monarch,  in  a  free  state,  may  govern 
any  part  of  the  dominions  of  such  a  state  in  an 
arbitrary  and  tyrannical  manner.  A  body  of  sub¬ 
jects  so  governed,  would,  if  sufficiently  numerous, 
be  fit  instruments  to  enslave  the  rest! 

The  intelligent  reader  will  admit  the  vast  import¬ 
ance  of  this  question,  both  to  the  present  age  and 
to  posterity;  and  perceive,  how  greatly  the  dear¬ 
est  interests  of  men,  who,  in  the  contingencies  of 
war  shall  hereafter  fall  under  the  British  dominion, 
may  possibly  be  concerned  in  its  discussion.  To 
such  readers  no  apology  will  be  necessary,  for  the 
detail  which  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  give  on 
a  subject  of  such  constitutional  magnitude.- — I  now 
return  to  transactions  with  the  colony. 


6  2 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

It  has  been  stated  that  the  first  assembly  met  in 
1765.  At  that  time,  none  of  the  French  Roman 
catholic  inhabitants  claimed  a  right,  or  even  expres¬ 
sed  a  desire,  of  becoming  members,  either  of  the 
council  or  assembly:  but  in  1768,  the  governor  re¬ 
ceived  instructions  from  the  crown,  to  admit  two  of 
them  into  the  council,  and  to  declare  others  to  be 
eligible  into  the  assembly,  on  taking  the  oaths  of 
allegiance  and  supremacy.  The  governor  was  di¬ 
rected  also  to  include  the  names  of  certain  per¬ 
sons  of  this  description,  in  the  commission  of  the 
peace. 

'  i  *t  -v  ' 

These  instructions,  and  the  measures  which 
were  taken  in  consequence  thereof,  gave  rise  to 
violent  commotions  and  party  divisions  in  the  co¬ 
lony,  which,  being  imbittered  by  religious  contro¬ 
versy,  continue  to  divide  the  inhabitants  to  the  pre¬ 
sent  hour.  It  were  highly  unbecoming  in  me  (a 
stranger  to  the  island)  to  flatter  the  passions  of  one 
party  or  the  other;  and  I  should  readily  consign  all 
the  circumstances  to  oblivion,  but  that  it  is  my 
duty  as  an  historian,  to  state,  without  prejudice, 
such  particulars  as  may,  in  their  consequences, 
affect  the  general  welfare  of  the  colony,  that  the 
errors  of  one  age  may  serve  as  a  lesson  to  the 
next. 

The  opposition  that  was  given  by  the  British  in¬ 
habitants  to  the  appointment  of  any  of  the  Roman 
catholic  capitulants  to  seats  in  the  legislature,  arose* 
J  believe,  originally,  from  an  idea  that  the  royal  in- 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  63 

structions,  in  this  case,  were  in  direct  violation  of 
the  test  act  of  Charles  II.  which  requires,  “  that  all 
persons  enjoying  any  place  of  trust  or  profit  shall, 
in  addition  to  the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  suprema¬ 
cy,  subscribe  a  declaration  against  the  doctrine  of 
transubstantiation  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord’s 
supper.”  By  the  king’s  instructions,  above  cited, 
his  Roman  catholic  subjects  of  Grenada  were  de¬ 
clared  eligible  without  subscribing  to  this  declara¬ 
tion. 

Liberal  and  enlightened  minds  at  this  day  are  not 
easily  reconciled  to  the  doctrine,  that  an  adherence 
to  mere  speculative  opinions  in  matters  of  faith, 
ought  to  drive  any  loyal  subject  from  the  service  of 
his  country,  or  deprive  a  man  (otherwise  entitled) 
of  the  enjoyment  of  those  honours  and  distinctions, 
the  distribution  of  which,  the  wisdom  of  the  laws 
has  assigned  to  the  sovereign.  Much  less  will  it 
be  thought,  that  such  a  man  is  unworthy  of  that 
confidence  which  his  neighbours  and  fellow  citi¬ 
zens,  who  are  best  acquainted  with  his  principles 
and  virtues,  and  are  themselves  of  a  different  per¬ 
suasion,  shall  think  fit  to  repose  in  him.  At  the 
same  time,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  the  re¬ 
cent  and  then  depending  claim  in  the  crown,  to  lay 
I  taxes  on  Grenada  by  its  own  authority,  gave  the 
inhabitants  just  cause  of  apprehension,  that  the 
royal  instructions  in  the  present  case  were  founded, 
in  like  manner,  on  a  pretension  to  legislative  autho¬ 
rity,  subversive  of  their  own  colonial  assembly. 


64 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  in. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  was  alleged,  that  the  test 
act  was  never  meant  to  extend  to  the  British  plan¬ 
tations;  that  it  was  confined,  both  in  its  letter  and 
spirit,  to  the  kingdom  of  England  and  the  town  of 
Berwick;  and  though  it  were  true,  that  it  is  the 
practice  of  the  courts  of  Grenada  to  adopt  both  the 
common  and  statute  law  of  England,  it  was  con¬ 
tended,  nevertheless,  that  the  adoption  could  ex¬ 
tend  only  to  such  of  the  English  statutes  as  were 
applicable  to  the  peculiar  situation  of  the  colony. 
It  was  urged,  that  the  act  in  question  originated  in 
an  age  of  religious  frenzy  and  fanatic  violence.  The 
authority  of  history  was  adduced  to  prove,  that  it 
was  particularly  promoted  by  a  worthless  individu¬ 
al,  from  animosity  to  the  Duke  of  \  ork,  who  was 
obliged,  in  consequence  of  it,  to  resign  the  great 
office  of  lord  high  admiral.  A  law  thus  founded 
and  supported,  instead  of  being  considered  as  suit¬ 
ed  to  the  circumstances  of  a  new  and  infant  colony, 
ought,  it  was  said,  to  be  expunged  from  the  Eng¬ 
lish  statute  book. 

What  influence  these,  or  other  considerations, 
had  on  the  British  ministry,  I  presume  not  to  say. 
It  is  certain  that  the  king  refused  to  revoke  his  in¬ 
structions;  in  consequence  whereof,  the  most  zea¬ 
lous  of  the  protestant  members  of  the  assembly  de¬ 
clining  to  attend,  it  wgs  seldom  that  a  house  could 
be  formed.  Public  affairs  soon  fell  into  the  utmost 
confusion,  and  in  this  state  of  faction  and  perplexi¬ 
ty,  the  island  continued,  until  its  re-capture  by  the 
French  in  1779. 


CHAP.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  65 

On  this  occasion,  charges  were  brought  against 
the  French  inhabitants  which  I  will  not  repeat,  be¬ 
cause  I  have  no  other  evidence  to  support  them 
than  the  mutual  reproaches,  and  reciprocal  accusa¬ 
tions  of  the  parties.  The  complaints  indeed  which 
were  loudly  made  on  the  part  of  the  French,  of 
an  usurpation  of  their  dearest  rights  by  the  prevail¬ 
ing  faction,  seemed  to  imply,  that  they  relied  rather 
on  justification  than  denial. 

The  French  ministry  however  required  no  other 
encouragement  for  attacking  this  island,  than  the 
defenceless  state  in  which  all  the  British  settle¬ 
ments  in  the  West  Indies  were  at  that  juncture 
notoriously  left.  The  hopeless  and  destructive  war 
in  North  America  had  drawn  to  its  vortex  all  the 
powers,  resources,  and  exertions  of  Great  Britain. 
Already  had  Dominica  and  St.  Vincent  become  a 
sacrifice  to  that  unfortunate  contest;  when  it  fell 
to  the  lot  of  Grenada  to  experience  her  share  of 
the  general  misfortune. 

On  the  2d  of  July  1779,  a  French  armament, 
consisting  of  a  fleet  of  25  ships  of  the  line,  10  fri¬ 
gates,  and  5000  troops,  under  the  command  of  the 
Count  D’Estaing,  appeared  off  the  harbour  and 
town  of  St.  George;  the  whole  force  of  the  island 
was  composed  of  90  men  of  the  48th  regiment, 
300  militia  of  the  island,  and  150  seamen  from  the 
merchant  ships;  and  its  fortifications  consisted 
chiefly  of  an  intrenchment,  which  had  been  hastily 

Vol.  I.  1 


66 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

thrown  up  round  the  summit  of  the  Hospital-hill. 
This  intrenchment  the  count  D’Estaing  invested 
the  next  day,  at  the  head  of  3000  of  his  best  forces, 
which  he  led  up  in  three  columns,  and  after  a  hard 
conflict  and  the  loss  of  300  men,  carried  the  lines. 
Nevef  did  so  small  a  body  of  men  make  a  nobler 
defence  against  such  inequality  of  numbers.  The 
governor  (lord  Macartney)  and  the  remains  of  his 
little  garrison,  immediately  retired  into  the  old  fort, 
at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour;  which  however  was 
wholly  untenable,  being  commanded  by  the  Hospi¬ 
tal-hill  battery,  the  guns  of  which  having  been  most 
unfortunately  left  unspiked,  were  now  turned  against 
them.  At  day-break,  the  French  opened  a  battery 
of  two  twenty-four  pounders  against  the  walls  of  the 
old  fort.  In  this  situation.*  the  governor  and  inhabi¬ 
tants  had  no  resource  but  in  the  hopes  of  obtaining 
favourable  terms  of  capitulation;  and  herein  they 
were  disappointed.  Their  proposals  were  scorn¬ 
fully  rejected,  and  such  hard  and  extraordinary 
terms  offered  and  insisted  on  by  count  D’Estaing, 
as  left  them  no  alternative  but  the  sacrifice  of  their 
honour,  or  an  unconditional  surrender.  They  em¬ 
braced  the  latter;  and  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
that  the  protection  which  was  afforded  to  the  help¬ 
less  inhabitants  of  the  town,  and  their  property, 
not  only  while  the  treaty  was  depending,  but  also 
after  the  surrender  of  the  island  at  discretion,  re¬ 
flected  the  highest  lustre  on  the  discipline  as  well 
as  humanity  of  the  conquerors.  Protection  and 
safe-guards  were  granted  on  every  application,  and 


CHAP.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  67 

thus  a  town  was  saved  from  plunder,  which  by  the 
strict  rules  of  war  might  have  been  given  up  to  an 
exasperated  soldiery. 

It  is  to  be  lamented  that  the  subsequent  conduct 
of  the  French  government  of  Grenada,  towards  its 
new  subjects,  was  not  quite  so  generous.  By  an 
ordinance  of  the  Count  de  Durat,  the  new  govern¬ 
or,  they  were  enjoined,  under  the  penalty  of  mili¬ 
tary  execution  and  confiscation  of  property,  due  from 
the  payment,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  ail  debts  due 
by  them  to  British  subjects,  residing  in  any  part  of 
the  British  dominions ;  and  by  another  ordinance,  the 
prohibition  was  extended  to  such  debts  owing  to 
the  subjects  of  the  United  Provinces  of  Holland, 
as  were  guaranteed  by  any  of  the  subjects  of  Great 
Britain.  The  Count  D’Estaing  had  inserted  clauses 
to  the  same  effect,  in  the  form  of  capitulation, 
which  he  had  tendered  to  the  garrison,  and  it  was 
those  prohibitions  that  induced  the  British  inhabi¬ 
tants  with  an  honest  indignation,  to  risk  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  an  unconditional  surrender,  rather  than 
submit  to  them.  With  the  virtue  and  integrity 
that  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  for  ever  distinguish  the 
British  character,  they  considered  no  sacrifice  so 
great  as  the  violation  of  that  confidence,  which  had 
been  reposed  in  them  by  their  friends  and  creditors 
in  Europe.  But  the  ordinances  went  still  further. 
By  the  regulations  which  they  contained,  it  was 
enacted,  that  all  the  estates  belonging  to  English 
absentees,  should  be  put  into  the  hands  of  certain 
..persons  to  be  nominated  by  the  governor,  called 


68 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

conservators  j  and  the  produce  be  paid  into  the  pub¬ 
lic  treasury.  Thus  was  plunder  sanctioned  by  au¬ 
thority;  and  the  absent  proprietors  were  not  the  on¬ 
ly  victims.  The  shameful  facility  with  which  every 
French  claimant  was  put  into  possession  of  estates  to 
which  the  slightest  pretension  was  set  up,  gave 
the  resident  planters  reason  to  apprehend,  that  the 
only  indulgence  they  were  to  expect,  was  that 
which  Poliphemus  promised  Ulysses,  of  being  de¬ 
voured  the  last. 

Most  of  these  injurious  proceedings,  and  various 
acts  ot  personal  oppression,  inflicted  on  the  con¬ 
quered  inhabitants  of  Grenada,  were,  by  them, 
imputed  to  the  too  great  influence  with  the  gover¬ 
nor  of  their  late  fellow  subjects  and  neighbours, 
the  French  planters ;  and  it  is  much  easier  to  ac¬ 
count  for,  than  to  justify  their  conduct.  Let  it  be 
remembered,  however,  to  the  honour  of  the  french 
nation,  that  these  nefarious  proceedings  were  no 
sooner  made  known  to  the  court  of  France,  than 
they  were  disapproved  and  reprobated.  The  ap¬ 
pointment  of  conservators  was  abolished,  and  re¬ 
storation  ordered  to  be  made  of  the  estates  of 
absent  proprietors.  Redress  was  likewise  very  ge¬ 
nerally  given  by  appeals  in  the  last  resort,  to  such 
of  the  resident  planters  as  had  been  illegally  depri¬ 
ved  of  their  possessions.  Rut  it  was  not  long  before 
the  island  itself  reverted  to  the  British  dominion. 

Grenada  and  the  Grenadines  were  restored  to 
Great  Britain,  with  all  the  other  captured  islands 


CHAP.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  69 

in  the  West  Indies,  (Tobago  excepted),  by  the  ge¬ 
neral  pacification  which  took  place  in  January 
1783;  a  pacification  upon  which,  whatever  may 
be  its  general  merits,  it  is  impossible  but  that  the 
English  sugar  planters  (except  perhaps  those  of 
the  ceded  island)  must  reflect  with  grateful  satisfac¬ 
tion.  It  might  indeed  have  been  wished,  by  those 
who  have  at  heart  the  present  repose  and  future 
prosperity  of  mankind,  that  some  salutary  regula¬ 
tions  had  been  framed,  at  the  same  time,  for  pre¬ 
venting  the  revival  of  those  unhappy  national  ani¬ 
mosities  among  the  white  inhabitants  of  Grenada, 
of  which,  I  have  so  largely  spoken,  and  which  I 
am  sorry  to  be  informed,  were  renewed  on  the  re¬ 
storation  of  the  island,  with  additional  force  and  ag¬ 
gravated  violence.  It  is  not  my  intention  however 
to  enter  into  any  further  detail  on  the  subject.  As 
a  friend  to  the  interests  of  humanity,  independent 
of  religious  opinions,  and  locality  of  birth,  I  shall 
rejoice,  if  means  can  be  found  to  restore  to  this  lit¬ 
tle  community  that  peace,  confidence  and  unanimi¬ 
ty,  without  which  its  inhabitants  must  be  a  ruined 
people,  and  a  prey  to  the  first  invader. 

Having  thus,  as  I  conceive,  sufficiently  treated  of 
the  historical  and  political  concerns  of  this  valuable 
colony,  I  shall  conclude  with  a  short  display  of  its 
present  state  (1791),  in  respect  of  soil,  population, 
productions,  and  exports;  premising,  that  many  of 
those  little  islands  which  are  called  the  Grenadines, 
no  longer  appertain  to  the  government  of  Grenada. 
By  an  arrangement  of  the  British  administration, 


7o  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  nr. 

which  has  taken  effect  since  the  peace,  a  line  of 
division  passes  in  an  east  and  west  direction,  be¬ 
tween  Cariacou  and  Union  island.  The  former  of 
these,  and  some  smaller  islands  south  of  it,  are  all 
that  are  now  comprized  in  the  Grenada  govern¬ 
ment  ;  Union  island,  with  all  the  little  islands  ad¬ 
joining,  to  the  north,  being  annexed  to  the  go¬ 
vernment  of  St.  Vincent. 

Grenada  is  computed  to  be  about  twenty-four 
miles  in  length  and  twelve  miles  in  its  greatest 
breadth,  and  contains  about  80,000  acres  of  land; 
of  which,  although  no  less  than  72,141  acres  paid 
taxes  in  1776,  and  may  therefore  be  supposed  fit 
for  cultivation,  yet  the  quantity  actually  cultivated 
has  never  exceeded  50,000  acres.  Ine  face  of  the 
country  is  mountainous,  but  not  inaccessible  in  any 
part,  and  it  abounds  with  springs  and  rivulets.  To 
the  north  and  the  east,  the  soil  is  a  brick  mould ; 
•the  same  or  nearly  the  same,  as  that  of  which 
mention  has  been  made  in  the  history  of  Jamaica. 
On  the  west  side,  it  is  a  rich  black  mould  on  a 
substratum  of  yellow  clay.  To  the  south,  the  land 
in  general  is  poor,  and  of  a  reddish  hue,  and  the 
•same  extends  over  a  considerable  part  of  the  inte¬ 
rior  country.  On  the  whole,  however,  Grenada 
appears  to  be  fertile  in  a  high  degree,  and  by  the 
variety,  as  well  as  excellence,  of  its  returns,  seems 
adapted  to  every  tropical  production-  The  exports 
of  the  year  1776,  from  Grenada  and  its  depen¬ 
dencies,  were  14,012,157  lbs.  of  muscovado,  and 
.<4,273,697  lbs.  of  clayed  sugar;  818,700  gallons  x>t 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  71 

rum  ;  1,827,166 lbs.  of  coffee;  457,719  lbs.  of  ca¬ 
cao;  91,943  lbs.  of  cotton;  27,638  lbs.  of  indigo, 
and  some  smaller  articles  ;  the  whole  of  which, 
on  a  moderate  computation,  could  not  be  worth  less 
at  the  ports  of  shipping,  than  ,£.600,000  sterling, 
excluding  freight,  duties,  insurance  and  other  char- 
o-es.  It  deserves  to  be  remembered  too,  that  the 
sugar  was  the  produce  of  106  plantations  only,  and 
that  they  were  worked  by  18,293  negroes,  which 
was  therefore  rather  more  than  one  hogshead  of 
muscovado  sugar,  of  16  cwt.  from  the  labour  of 
each  negro,  old  and  young,  employed  in  the  cul¬ 
tivation  of  that  commodity;  a  prodigious  return, 
equalled,  I  believe,  by  no  other  British  island  in 

the  West  Indies,  St.  Christopher’s  excepted. - 

The  exports  of  1787  will  be  given  hereafter  :  they 
will  be  found,  except  in  one  or  two  articles,  to  fall 
greatly  short  of  those  of  1776  ;  a  circumstance  for 
which  I  know  not  wholly  how  to  account.* 

This  island  is  divided  into  six  parishes,  St. 
George,  St.  David,  St.  Andrew,  St.  Patrick,  St. 
Mark,  and  St.  John;  and  its  chief  dependency 


*  This  circumstance  is  the  more  surprising  as  the  sugar  plantations 
in  Grenada,  for  seme  years  previous  to  the  hurricane  in  1780,  suffeied 
greatly  by  the  ravages  of  the  sugar,  or  carnivorous  ant.  Of  this 
wondeifui  insect  a  curious  account  was  transmitted  to  the  Royal  Soci¬ 
ety  of  London,  an  abridgment  of  which  the  reader  will  find  in  an  Ap¬ 
pendix  to  this  chapter.  I  conceive  however  (notwithstanding  what  is 
asserted  to  the  contrary  in  that  account)  that  this  species  of  ant,  is 
comm oti  to  all  the  islands  in  the  Wdst  Indies,  and  has  been  known 
in  them  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  from  the  earliest  times.  It  is  the 


72  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  nr. 

Cariacou,  forms  a  seventh  parish.  It  is  only  since 
the  restoration  of  Grenada  to  Great  Britain  by  the 
peace  of  1783,  that  an  island  law  has  been  obtain¬ 
ed  for  the  establishment  of  a  protestant  clergy. 
This  act  passed  in  1784,  and  provides  stipends  of 
£.330  currency,  and  £.60  for  house-rent  per  an¬ 
num,  for  five  clergymen,  viz.  one  for  the  town  and 
parish  of  St.  George,  three  for  the  other  five  out- 
parishes  of  Grenada,  and  one  for  Cariacou.  Besides 
these  stipends,  there  are  valuable  glebe  lands, 
which  had  been  appropriated  to  the  support  of  the 
Roman  catholic  clergy,  whilst  that  was  the  esta¬ 
blished  religion  of  Grenada.  These  lands,  according 
to  an  opinion  of  the  attorney  and  solicitor-general 
of  England  (to  whom  a  question  on  this  point  was 
referred  by  the  crown)  became  vested  in  his  majes¬ 
ty  as  public  lands,  on  the  restoration  of  the  island 
to  the  British  government,  and  I  believe  have 
since  been  applied  by  the  colonial  legislature,  with 
the  consent  of  the  crown,  to  the  further  support 
of  the  protestant  church,  with  some  allowance 
thereout  (to  what  amount  I  am  not  informed)  for 
the  benefit  of  the  tolerated  Romish  clergy  of  the 
remaining  French  inhabitants. 


formica  omnivora  of  Linnaeus,  and  is  well  described  by  Sloane  as  the 
formica  fusca  minima ,  antennis,  longissimis.  (vide  note  in  page  141 
of  first  volume).  Its  trivial  name  in  Jamaica,  is  the  Raffles  ant, 
from  one  Thomas  Raffles,  who  is  charged  with  having  imported  them 
from  the  Havanna  about  the  year  1762.  They  do  no  injury  to  the 
sugar  canes  in  Jamaica ;  probably,  because  their  numbers  are  few. 
From  what  causes  they  increased  so  prodigiously  in  Grenada,  no  sa¬ 
tisfactory  account  has  I  believe  been  given. 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  II.] 


73 


The  capital  of  Grenada,  by  an  ordinance  of  go¬ 
vernor  Melville,  soon  after  the  cession  of  the  coun¬ 
try  to  Great  Britain  by  the  Peace  of  Paris,  is  call¬ 
ed  St.  George.  By  this  ordinance  English  names 
were  given  to  the  several  towns  and  parishes,  and 
their  French  names  forbidden  to  be  thereafter  used 
in  any  public  acts.  The  French  name  of  the  capital 
was  Fort  Royal.  It  is  situated  in  a  spacious  bay, 
on  the  west  or  lee-side  of  the  island,  not  far  from 
the  south  end,  and  possesses  one  of  the  safest  and 
most  commodious  harbours  for  shipping  in  the 
English  West  Indies,  which  has  been  lately  forti¬ 
fied  at  a  very  great  expense.* 

The  other  towns  in  Grenada,  are,  properly 
speaking,  inconsiderable  villages  or  hamlets,  which 
are  generally  situated  at  the  bays  or  shipping  places 
in  the  several  out-parishes.  The  parish  town  of 
Cariacou  is  called  Hillsborough. 


Grenada  has  two  ports  of  entry,  with  separate 
establishments,  and  distinct  revenue  officers,  inde- 


*  The  town  of  Saint  George  is  built  chiefly  of  brick,  and  makes  a 
handsome  appearance.  It  is  divided  by  a  ridge,  which  running  into 
the  sea,  forms  on  one  side  the  carenage,  on  the  other  the  bay :  thus 
there  is  the  Bay-town,  which  boasts  a  handsome  square  and  market¬ 
place,  and  the  Carenage -town,  wherein  the  principal  merchants  reside, 
the  ships  lying  land-locked,  and  in  deep  water  close  to  the  wharfs.  On 
the  ridu-e  between  the  two  towns  stands  the  church,  and  on  the  pro- 
montory  above  it  is  a  large  old  fort,  which  was  probably  construct¬ 
ed  by  the  first  French  inhabitants.  It  is  built  of  stone,  and  is  large 
enough  to. accommodate  an  entire  regiment. 

Vol.  IT. 


K 


74 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

pendent  of  each  other,  viz.  one  at  St.  George,  the 
capital,  and  one  at  Grenville-bay,  a  town  and  har¬ 
bour  on  the  east  or  windward  side  of  the  island. 
The  former,  by  the  27  Geo.  III.  c.  27,  is  made  a 
free  port. 

Whether  it  be  owing  to  the  events  of  war,  to 
domestic  dissentions,  or  to  calamities  inflicted  by  the 
hand  of  Divine  Providence,  I  know  not,  but  it  ap¬ 
pears,  that  the  white  population  of  Grenada  and  the 
Grenadines  has  decreased  considerably  since  these 
islands  first  came  into  possession  of  the  English. 
The  number  of  white  inhabitants  in  the  year  1771, 
was  known  to  be  somewhat  more  than  sixteen 
hundred;  in  1777  they  had  decreased  to  thirteen 
hundred ;  and  at  this  time,  they  are  supposed  not 
to  exceed  one  thousand  two  hundred,  of  which 
about  two  thirds  are  men  able  to  bear  arms,  and 
incorporated  into  five  regiments  of  militia,  inclu¬ 
ding  a  company  of  free  blacks  or  mulattoes,  attach¬ 
ed  to  each.  There  are  likewise  about  500  regular 
troops  from  Great  Britain  which  are  supported  on 
the  British  establishment.* 

The  negro  slaves  have  also  decreased.  By  the 
last  returns  preceding  the  capture  of  the  island  in 

*  Besides  the  regular  troops  which  are  sent  from  Great  Britain  for 
the  protection  of  Grenada,  there  are  in  its  garrison  three  companies  of 
king's  negroes,  which  came  from  America,  where  they  served  in  three 
capacities,  as  pioneers,  art  ficers,  and  light  dragoons.  In  Grenada 
they  form  a  company  of  each,  and  are  commanded  by  a  lieutenant  of 
the  regulars,  having  captain’s  rank. 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  75 

1779,  they  were  stated  at  35,000,  of  which  5,000 
were  in  Cariacou,  and  the  smaller  islands.  In  1785 
they  amounted  to  no  more  than  23,926  in  the 
whole.  The  decrease  was  owing,  partly,  to  the 
want  of  any  regular  supply  during  the  French  go¬ 
vernment,  and  partly,  to  the  numbers  carried  from 
the  island  by  the  French  inhabitants,  both  before 
and  after  the  peace.  It  is  also  to  be  observed, 
that  of  the  African  cargoes  sold  at  Grenada,  some 
part  (perhaps  a  fourth  or  fifth)  are  exported  to  the 
neighbouring  French  and  Spanish  colonies. 

The  free  people  of  colour  amounted  in  1787, 
to  1,115.  To  prevent  the  too  great  increase  of  this 
mixed  race,  every  manumission  is,  by  an  act  of  this 
island,  charged  with  ,a  fine  of  one  hundred  pounds 
currency,  payable  into  the  public  treasury.  But 
this  law  has  neither  operated  as  a  productive  fund, 
nor  as  a  prohibition ;  for  it  is  usually  evaded  by  exe¬ 
cuting  and  recording  acts  of  manumission  in  some 
other  island  or  government  where  there  is  no  such 
law.  The  evidence  of  all  coloured  people  of  free 
condition,  is  received  in  the  courts  of  this  island, 
on  their  producing  sufficient  proof  of  their  freedom ; 
and  such  free  people  are  tried  on  criminal  charges 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  whites.  They  are  also 
.allowed  to  possess  and  enjoy  lands  and  tenements 
to  any  amount,  provided  they  are  native-born  sub¬ 
jects  or  capituiants,  and  not  aliens. 

The  governor,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  is  chan¬ 
cellor,  ordinary  and  vice-admiral,  and  presides  sole- 


76  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m. 

ly  in  the  courts  of  chancery  and  ordinary,  as  in  Ja¬ 
maica.  His  salary  is  <£.3,200  currency  per  an¬ 
num*,  which  is  raised  by  a  poll-tax  on  all  slaves; 
and  it  is  the  practice  in  Grenada  to  pass  a  salary  bill' 
on  the  arrival  of  every  new  governor,  to  continue 
during  his  government.  In  all  cases  of  absence 
beyond  twelve  months,  the  salary  ceases  and  de¬ 
termines. 

The  council  of  Grenada  consists  of  twelve  mem¬ 
bers,  and  the  assembly  of  twenty-six.  The  pow¬ 
ers,  privileges  and  functions  of  both  these  branches 
of  the  legislature,  are  the  same,  and  exercised  pre¬ 
cisely  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the  council 
and  assembly  in  Jamaica.  A  freehold  or  life  estate, 
of  fifty  acres,  is  a  qualification  for  a  representative 
for  a  parish,  and  a  freehold,  or  life  estate,  in  fifty 
pounds  house-rent  in  St.  George,  qualifies  a  repre¬ 
sentative  for  the  town.  An  estate  of  ten  acres  in 
free,  or  for  life,  or  a  rent  of  ten  pounds,  in  any  of 
the  out-towns,  gives  a  vote  for  the  representatives 
of  each  parish  respectively;  .and  a  rent  of  twenty 
pounds  per  annum,  issuing  out  of  any  freehold  or 
life  estate  in  the  town  of  St.  George,  gives  a  vote 
for  a  representative  for  the  town. 

The  law  courts  in  Grenada,  besides  those  of 
chancery  and  ordinary,  are,  first,  the  court  of  grand 
sessions  of  the  peace,  held  twice  a  year,  viz.  in 

*  The  currency  of  Grenada,  or  rate  of  exchange,  is  commonly  65 
per  centum  worse  than  sterling. 


77 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

March  and  September.  In  this  court,  the  first  per¬ 
son  named  in  the  commission  of  the  peace  pre¬ 
sides,  who  is  usually  the  president  or  senior  in 
council. 

2dly,  The  court  of  common  pleas.  The  court 
consists  of  one  chief  and  four  assistant  justices, 
whose  commissions  are  during  pleasure.  The 
chief  justice  is  usually  appointed  in  England,  a 
professional  man,  and  receives  a  salary  of  £. 600 
per  annum.  The  four  assistant  justices  are  usually 
appointed  by  the  governor  from  among  the  gentle¬ 
men  of  the  island ;  and  act  without  salary. 

3dly,  The  court  of  exchequer.  The  barons  in 
this  court  are  commissioned  in  like  manner  as  in 
the  court  of  common  pleas.  But  this  court  is 
lately  grown  into  disuse. 

4thly,  The  court  of  admiralty,  for  trial  of  all 
prize  causes  of  capture  from  enemies  in  war,  and 
of  revenue  seizures  in  peace  or  war.  There  is  one 
judge  of  admiralty  and  one  surrogate. 

Lastly,  The  governor  and  council  compose  a 
court  of  error,  as  in  Jamaica,  for  trying  all  appeals 
of  error  from  the  court  of  common  pleas. 

Although  there  is  no  law  of  Grenada  declaring 
an  adoption  of  the  laws  of  England,  yet  it  has  been 
always  the  practice  of  the  courts,  to  consider  both 
the  common  and  statute  law  of  England  to  extend  to 


78  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

Grenada  in  all  applicable  cases,  not  otherwise  provi¬ 
ded  for  by  particular  laws  of  the  island.  So  in  like 
manner,  the  practice  of  the  courts  in  Westminster- 
hall,  and  authentic  reports  of  adjudged  cases  there, 
are  resorted  to,  when  precedents  and  authorities 
are  wanting  in  the  island.  In  the  case  of  its  slave 
laws,  it  may  be  said  with  truth  and  justice,  that 
the  assembly  of  this  island  have  shewn  a  liberality 
of  sentiment  which  reflects  the  highest  honour  on 
their  characters,  both  as  legislators  and  Christians. 

I  have  now  furnished  the  reader  with  all  the  in¬ 
formation  I  have  collected  concerning  the  past 
history,  and  present  state,  of  the  island  of  Grena¬ 
da,*  and  if  it  shall  be  thought  deficient,  or  unin- 
structive,  the  fault  is  not  in  the  want  of  materials, 
but  in  the  workman.  Something  however  remains 
to  be  observed  concerning  such  of  the  Grenadines 
as  are  dependant  on  the  Grenada  government,  the 
chief  of  which  are  Cariacou  and  Isle  Ronde.  The 
former  contains  6,913  acres  of  land,  and  in  general 
it  is  fertile  and  well  cultivated ;  producing  in  sea¬ 
sonable  years  a  million  of  pounds  of  cotton  for 
exportation,  besides  corn,  yams,  potatoes,  and 
plantains  sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  its  ne¬ 
groes.  The  cultivation  of  sugar  has  been  found 
less  successful  in  this  island  than  cotton,  though 
it  still  continues  to  be  made  on  two  plantations. 

*  This  was  written  in  1791  :  since  that  time  Grenada  has  sustain¬ 
ed  a  melancholy  reverse  of  fortune,  some  particulars  of  which  will  fee 
related  in  a  subsequent  volume. 


chap.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  79 

Isle  Ronde  contains  about  500  acres  of  excellent 
land,  which  are  wholly  applied  to  pasturage,  and 
the  cultivation  of  cotton.  It  is  situated  about 
midway  between  Cariacou  and  the  north  end  of 
Grenada,  about  four  leagues  from  each. 

I  shall  close  my  account  of  this  colony,  as  of 
Barbadoes,  with  an  authentic  return  by  the  In¬ 
spector  general  of  Great  Britain,  of  the  exports 
from  Grenada  and  its  dependencies,  for  the  year 
1787 5  containing  also  an  estimate  of  the  actual 
value  of  the  several  articles  at  the  British  mar¬ 
ket; 
chap.  II.]  WEST  INDIES. 


POSTCRXPT 


TO  THE  HISTORY  OF  GRENADA . 


The  first  edition  of  this  work  having  fallen  into  the  hands 
of  a  gentleman  of  distinguished  abilities  and  learning , 
done  of  his  majesty's  serjeants  at  law J,  he  was  pleased, 
at  the  author's  request,  to  communicate  his  thoughts  m 
writing  on  the  doctrine  maintained  by  lord  Mansfield, 
concerning  the  legal  authority  of  the  crown  over  con¬ 
quered  countries,  as  stated  in  page  54-  of  this  volume, 
which  I  have  great  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  reader 
in  the  precise  words  in  which  they  were  given: 

THE  ground  upon  which  the  court  rested  their  judg¬ 
ment  in  the  case  of  Grenada,  was  clearly  sufficient  to 
warrant  that  judgment,  even  admitting  the  doctrine  laid 
down  bv  lord  Mansfield  on  the  other  point  to.be  well  found¬ 
ed;  but  nothing  can  be  more  unfounded  than  that  doctrine: 
— every  proposition  upon  which  it  is  made  to  rest  is  a  falla¬ 
cy.  I  deny  that  the  king  (at  least  since  the  constitution  has 
had  its  present  form)  can  “  arbitrarily  grant  or  refuse  a 
capitulation.”  The  power  of  granting  or  refusing  a  capitu¬ 
lation,  in  the  case  of  a  siege  or  invasion,  is  certainly  vest- 

Wol.  II.  l 


82 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

ed  in  him  ;  but  it  is  vested  in  him  like  every  other  power 
■with  which  he  is  intrusted  by  the  British  constitution,  to  be 
exercised  according  to  the  usage  which  has  prevailed  in  like 
cases.  If  that  power  should  be  abused,  his  officers  and 

ministers  must  answer  to  the  public  for  their  misconduct. 

/ 

For  the  same  reason  I  deny,  that  “  the  king  can  put  the 
inhabitants  of  a  conquered  country  to  the  sword,  or  other¬ 
wise  exterminate  them,”  unless  such  severity  be  fully  justi¬ 
fied  by  the  laws  of  war,  as  they  are  understood  amongst 
civilized  nations. 

But,  supposing  that  a  case  should  happen  wherein  such 
severity  would  be  justifiable,  I  deny  that,  upon  the  exter¬ 
mination  of  the  enemy,  the  lands  would  belong  to  the  king 
himself:  1  say  thev  would  belong  to  the  state;  and  that 
they  would  be  subjec',  not  merely  to  the  king,  but  to  the 
sovereign  power  which  governs  the  British  dominions.  If 
the  king  receives  the  inhabitants  under  his  protection,  and 
grants  them  their  property,  I  deny  that  he  has  powmr  to  fix 
such  terms  and  conditions  as  he  thinks  proper;  for  he  can¬ 
not  reserve  to  himself  in  his  individual  capacity,  legislative 
power  over  them:  that  wmuld  be  to  exc  ude  the  authority 
of  the  British  legislature  from  the  government  of  a  country 
subdued  by  British  forces,  and  would  be  an  attempt  to  erect 
imperium  in  imperio.  One  consequence  of  this  would 
be,  that  such  conquered  territory  might  descend  to  an 
heir  of  the  king  not  qualified,  according  to  the  act  of  settle¬ 
ment,  to  succeed  to  the  crown  of  Great  Britain.  The  king 
might  give  it  to  a  younger  son,  or  bestow  it  on  a  stranger. 
A  thousand  other  absurd  consequences  might  be  pointed 
out,  as  resulting  from  such  incongruity. 

I  admit  that  the  king  (subject  to  the  responsibility  of  his 
ministers)  may  yield  up  a  conquest,  or  retain  it,  as  he  sees 
best:  but  I  deny,  for  the  reasons  above  hinted  at,  that  he 


postcript.]  WEST  INDIESo  S3 

can  impose  what  terms  he  pleases,  or  that  he  can  arbitrarily 
change  the  law  or  political  form  of  its  government.  I 
think  he  may  agree,  upon  the  capitulation,  that  the  con¬ 
quered  people  shall  continue  to  enjoy  their  ancient  religion 
and  laws,  and  even  this  must  be  sub  modo ;  but  I  deny  that 
he  could,  by  his  own  authority,  grant  these  things  after  the 
capitulation;  for  that  would  amount  to  an  exercise  of  inde¬ 
pendent  sovereignty.  The  fallacy  of  lord  Mansfield’s  argu¬ 
ment,  proceeds  from  an  endeavour  to  confound  the  king’s 
civil  and  military  characters,  and  to  perpetuate  in  the  chief 
executive  magistrate,  the  vast  powers  with  which  it  is  ne¬ 
cessary  to  invest  the  generalissimo  of  the  armies,  during  the 
continuance  of  military  operations.  The  moment  these 
operations  cease,  he  resumes  his  civil  character,  and  in  that 
character  no  man  will  venture  to  assert  that,  as  king  of 
Great  Britain,  he  has  the  prerogative  of  being  a  despot  in 
any  part  of  his  dominions. 

With  respect  to  the  cases  of  Ireland,  Wales,  and  Ber¬ 
wick,  even  taking  them  precisely  as  lord  Mansfield  puts 
them,  I  think  they  do  not  weigh  a  feather  in  the  argument. 
Those  cases  happened  long  before  the  English  constitution 
had  reduced  itself  to  its  present  form,  consequently,  before 
the  rights  of  the  people  were  ascertained  and  defined  as  they 
exist  at  present.  If  a  few  instances  of  the  exercise  of  arbi¬ 
trary  power  by  the  ancient  kings  of  England,  are  to  be  re¬ 
ceived  as  decisive  cases,  to  shew  what  are  the  powers  of  the 
crown  at  this  day,  I  think  it  would  be  no  very  difficult  task 
to  find  authorities,  even  as  low  down  as  the  reigns  of  the 
Plantagenets  and  Stuarts,  to  prove,  that  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  ought  to  be  a  pure  despotism  ! 


84- 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  iii. 


APPENDIX  TO  CHAP.  II.  OF  BOOK  HI. 


CONTAINING 

Observations  on  the  Sugar  Ants  in  the  Island  of  Grenada; 
extracted  from  a  letter  of  John  Castles ,  Esq.  to  Ge¬ 
neral  Melville :  read  before  the  Royal  Society  in  May 
1790. 

THE  sugar  ants,  so  called  from  their  ruinous  effects  on 
sugar  cane,  are  supposed  to  have  first  made  their  ap¬ 
pearance  in  Grenada  about  the  year  1770,  on  a  sugar  plan¬ 
tation  at  Petit  Havre;  a  bay  five  or  six  miles  from  the  town 
of  St.  George,  the  capital,  conveniently  situated  for  smug¬ 
gling  from  Martinico :  it  was  therefore  concluded,  they 
were  brought  from  thence  in  some  vessel  employed  in  that 
trade,  which  is  very  probable,  as  colonies  of  them  in  like 
manner  were  afterwards  propagated  in  different  parts  of  the 
island  by  droghers,  or  vessels  employed  in  carrying  stores, 
&c.  from  one  part  of  the  island  to  another. 

From  thence  they  continued  to  extend  themselves  on  all 
sides  for  several  years  destroying  in  succession  every  sugar 
plantation  between  St.  George's  and  St.  John’s,  a  space  of 
about  twelve  miles.  At  the  same  time,  colonies  of  them  be¬ 
gan  to  be  observed  in  different  parts  of  the  island,  particular¬ 
ly  at  Duquesne  on  the  north,  and  Calavini  on  the  south  side 
of  it. 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  85 

All  attempts  of  the  planters  to  put  a  stop  to  the  ravages 
of  these  insects  having  been  found  ineffectual,,  it  well  be¬ 
came  the  legislature,  to  offer  great  public  rewards  to  any  per¬ 
son  who  should  discover  a  practicable  method  of  destroying, 
them,  so  as  to  permit  the  cultivation  of  the  sugar  cane  as 
formerly.  Accordingly,  an  act  of  assembly  was  passed,  by 
which  such  discoverer  was  entitled  to  twenty  thousand 
pounds,  to  be  paid  from  the  public  treasury  of  the  island. 

Many  were  the  candidates  on  this  occasion,  but  very  far 
were  any  of  them  from  having  any  just  claim ;  nevertheless,, 
considerable  sums  of  money  Were  granted,  in  consideration 
of  trouble  and  expenses  in  making  experiments,  &c. 

In  Grenada. there' had  always  been  several  species  of  ants, 
differing  in  size,  colour,  &c.  which  however  were  perfect¬ 
ly  innocent  with  respect  to  the  sugar  cane..  The  ants  in 
question,  on  the  contrary,  were  not  only  highly  injurious 
to  it,  but  to  several  sorts  of  trees,  such  as  the  lime,  lemon, 
orange,  &c. 

These  ants  are  of  the  middle  size,  of  a  slender  make,  of 
a  dark  red  colour,  and  remarkable  for  the  quickness  of  their 
motions ;  but  their  greatest  peculiarities  are,  their  taste 
when  applied  to  the  tongue,  the  immensity  of  their  num¬ 
ber,  and  their  choice  of  places  for  their  nests. 

All  the  other  species  of  ants  in  Grenada  have  a  bitter 
musky  taste.  These,  on  the  contrary,  are  acid  in  the  high¬ 
est  degree,  and  when  a  number  of  them  were  rubbed  toge¬ 
ther  between  the  palms  of  the  hands,  they  emitted  a  strong 
vitriolic  sulphureous  smell;  so  much  so,  that  when  this 
experiment  was  made,  a  gentleman  conceived  that  it  might 
be  owing  to  this  quality  that  these  insects  were  so  unfriend¬ 
ly  to  vegetation.  This  criterion  to  distinguish  them  was 
infallible,  and  known  to  every  one. 


86 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

Their  numbers  were  incredible.  I  have  seen  the  roads 
coloured  by  them  for  miles  together;  and  so  crowd¬ 
ed  were  they  in  many  places,  that  the  print  of  the  horses 
feet  would  appear  for  a  moment  or  two,  until  filled  up  by 
the  surrounding  multitude.  This  is  no  exaggeration.  All 
the  other  species  of  ants,  although  numerous;  were  circum¬ 
scribed  and  confined  to  a  small  spot,  in  proportion  to  the 
space  occupied  by  the  cane  ants,  as  a  mole  hill  to  a  moun¬ 
tain. 

The  common  black  ants  of  that  country  had  their  nests 
about  the  foundation  of  houses  or  old  walls;  others  in  hol¬ 
low  trees ;  and  a  large  species  in  the  pastures,  descending 
by  a  small  aperture  under  ground.  The  sugar  ants,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  universally  constructed  their  nests  among  the  roots  of 
particular  plants  and  trees,  such  as  the  sugar-cane,  lime,  le¬ 
mon,  and  orange  trees,  &c. 

The  destruction  of  these  ants  was  attempted  chiefly  two 
ways ;  by  poison  and  the  application  of  fire. 

For  the  first  purpose,  arsenic  and  corrosive  sublimate 
mixed  with  animal  substances,  such  as  salt  fish,  herrings, 
crabs,  and  other  shell  fish,  &c.  were  used,  which  was 
greedily  devoured  by  them.  Myriads  of  them  were  thus 
destroyed;  and  the  more  so,  as  it  was  observed  by  a  magni¬ 
fying  glass,  and  indeed  (though  not  so  distinctly)  by  the 
naked  eye,  that  corrosive  sublimate  had  the  effect  of  render¬ 
ing  them  so  outrageous  that  they  destroyed  each  other ;  and 
that  effect  was  produced  even  by  coming  into  contact  with 
it.  But  it  is  clear,  and  it  was  found,  that  these  poisons 
could  not  be  laid  in  sufficient  quantities  over  so  large  a  tract 
of  land  as  to  give  the  hundred  thousandth  part  of  them  a 
taste. 


appendix]  WEST  INDIES.  87 

The  use  of  fire  afforded  a  greater  probability  of  success ; 
for  (from  whatever  cause)  it  was  observed,  that  if  wood, 
burnt  to  the  state  of  charcoal,  without  flame,  and  im¬ 
mediately  taken  from  the  fire,  was  laid  in  their  way,  they 
crowded  to  it  in  such  amazing  numbers  as  soon  to  extin¬ 
guish  it,  although  with  the  destruction  of  thousands  of 
them  in  effecting  it.  This  part  of  their  history  appears 
scarcely  credible;  but,  on  making  the  experiment  myself, 
I  found  it  literally  true.  I  laid  fire,  as  above  described, 
where  there  appeared  but  very  few  ants,  and  in  the  course 
of  a  few  minutes  thousands  were  seen  crowding-  to  it  and 
upon  it,  till  it  was  perfectly  covered  by  their  dead  bodies. 
Holes  were  therefore  dug  at  proper  distances  in  a  cane  piece, 
and  fire  made  in  each  hole.  Prodigious  quantities  perished 
in  this  way  :  for  those  fires,  when  extinguished,  appeared 
in  the  shape  of  mole  hills,  from  the  numbers  of  their  dead 
bodies  heaped  on  them.  Nevertheless  the  ants  soon  appear¬ 
ed  again,  as  numerous  as  ever.  This  may  be  accounted  for, 
not  only  from  their  amazing  fecundity,  but  that  probably, 
none  of  the  breeding  ants  or  young  brood  suffered  from 
the  experiment. 

For  the  same  reason,  the  momentary  general  application 
of  fire  by  burning  the  cane  trash  (or  straw  of  the  cane)  as 
it  lay  on  the  ground,  proved  as  little  effectual ;  for  although, 
perhaps,  multitudes  of  ants  might  have  been  destroyed,  yet 
in  general  they  would  escape  by  retiring  "to  their  nests  un¬ 
der  cover,  out  of  its  reach,  and  the  breeding  ants,  with 
their  young  progeny,  must  have  remained  unhurt. 

This  calamity,  which  resisted  so  long  the  efforts  of  the 
planters,  was  at  length  removed  by  another;  which,  how¬ 
ever  ruinous  to  the  other  islands  in  the  West  Indies,  and  in 
other  respects,  was  to  Grenada  proved  a  very  great  blessing; 
namely,  the  hurricane  in  1780;  without  which  it  is  pro¬ 
vable,  the  cultivation  of  the  sugar-cane  in  the  most  valu- 


88 


HISTORY  Of  THE  [book  nr. 

I 

able  parts  of  that  island  must  have  in  a  great  measure  been 
thrown  aside,  at  least  for  some  years.  How  this  hurricane 
produced  this  effect,  has  been  considered  rather  as  a  matter 
of  wonder  and  surprize  than  attempted  to  be  explained.  By 
attending  to  the  following  observations,  the  difficulty,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  will  be  removed. 

These  ants  make  their  nests,  or  cells  for  the  reception  of 
their  eggs,  only  under  or  among  the  roots  of  such  trees  or 
plants,  as  are  not  only  capable  of  protecting  them  from  hea¬ 
vy  rains,  but  are  at  the  same  time  so  firm  in  the  ground,  as 
to  afford  a  secure  basis  to  support  them  against  any  injury 
occasioned  by  the  agitation  of  the  usual  winds.  This  dou¬ 
ble  qualification  the  sugar  cane  possesses  in  a  very  great  de¬ 
gree;  fora  stool  of  canes  (which  is  the  assemblage  of  its  nu¬ 
merous  roots  where  the  stems  begin  to  shoot  out)  is  almost 
impenetrable  to  rain,  and  is  also  from  the  amazing  numbers 
and  extension  of  the  roots,  firmly  fixed  to  the  ground. 
Thus,  when  every  other  part  of  the  field  is  drenched  with 
rain,  the  ground  under  those  stools  will  be  found  quite  dry, 
as  I,  and  every  Other  planter  must  have,  observed,  when  dig¬ 
ging  out  the  stools  in  a  cane  piece,  to  prepare  for  replanting. 
And  when  canes  are  lodged  or  laid  down  by  the  usual  winds, 
or  fall  down  by  their  own  luxuriancy,  the  stools,  common¬ 
ly,  remain  in  the  ground;  hence,  in  ordinary  weather,  the 
nests  of  these  ants  are  in  a  state  of  perfect  security. 

The  lime,  lemon,  ©range,  and  some  other  trees,  afford 
these  insects  the  same  advantages,  from  the  great  number 
and  quality  of  their  roots,  which  are  firmly  fixed  to  the 
earth,  and  are  very  large;  besides  which,  their  tops  are  so 
very  thick  and  umbrageous,  as  to  prevent  even  a  very  heavy 
rain  from  reaching  the  ground  underneath. 

On  the  contrary,  these  ants’  nests  are  never  found  at  the 
roots  of  trees  or  plants  incapable  of  affording  the  above 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  89 

protection  ;  such  for  instance  as  the  coffee  tree:  it  is  indeed 
sufficiently  firm  in  the  ground,  but  it  has  only  one  large  tap 
root,  which  goes  straight  downwards;  and  its  lateral  roots 
are  so  small  as  to  afford  no  shelter  against  rain.  So  again, 
the  roots  of  the  cotton  shrub  run  too  near  the  surface  of 
the  earth  to  prevent  the  access  of  rain,  and  are  neither  suf¬ 
ficiently  permanent,  nor  firm  enough  to  resist  die  agitation 
by  the  usual  winds.  The  same  observation  will  be  found 
true  with  respect  to  cacao,  plantains,  maize,  tobacco,  in¬ 
digo,  and  many  other  species  of  trees  and  plants. 

Trees  or  plants  of  the  first  description  always  suffer  more 
or  less  in  lands  infested  with  these  ants  ;  whereas  those  of 
the  latter  never  do.  Hence  we  may  fairly  conclude,  that 
the  mischief  done  by  these  insects  is  occasioned  only  bv 
their  lodging  and  making  their  nests  about  the  roots  of  par¬ 
ticular  trees  or  plants.  Thus  the  roots  of  the  sugar-canes 
are  somehow  or  other  so  much  injured  bv  them,  as  to  be 
incapable  of  performing  their  office  of  supplying  due  nou¬ 
rishment  to  the  plants,  which,  therefore  become  sickly  and 
stinted,  and  consequently  do  not  afford  juices  fit  for  making 
sugar  in  either  tolerable  quantity  or  quality. 

That  these  ants  do  not  feed  on  any  part  of  the  canes  or 
trees  affected  seems  very  clear,  for  no  loss  of  substance  in 
either  the  one  or  the  other  has  ever  been  observed;  nor  have 
they  ever  been  seen  carrying  off  vegetable  substances  of  any 
sort. 

On  the  contrary,  there  is  the  greatest  presumption  that 
these  ants  are  carnivorous,  and  feed  entirely  on  animal 
substances;  for  if  a  dead  insect,  or  animal  food  of  any  sort, 
was  laid  in  their  way,  it  was  immediately  carried  off.  It 
was  found  almost  impossible  to  preserve  cold  victuals  from 
them.  The  largest  carcases,  as  soon  as  they  began  to  be- 

Vol.  IT 


M 


9D  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

come  putrid,  so  as  that  they  could  separate  the  parts,  soon 
disappeared.  Negroes  with  sores  had  difficulty  to  keep  the 
ants  from  the  edges  of  them.  They  destroyed  all  other 
vermin,  rats  in  particular,  of  Which  they  cleared  every 
plantation  they  came  upon,  which  they  probably  effected  by 
attacking  their  young.  It  was  found  that  poultry  or  other 
small  stock,  could  be  raised  only  with  the  greatest  difficul¬ 
ty,  and  the  eyes,  nose,  and  other  emunctoriesof  the  bodies 
of  dying  or  dead  animals  were  instantly  covered  with  these 
ants. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  appears,  that  a  dry  situation, 
so  as  to  exclude  the  ordinary  rains  from  their  nests  or  cells, 
appropriated  for  the  reception  of  their  eggs  or  young  biood* 
is  absolutely  necessary ;  but  that  these  situations,  however 
well  calculated  for  the  usual  weather,  could  not  affoid  this 
protection  from  rain  during  the  hurricane,  may  be  easily 
conceived. 

When,  by  the  violence  of  the  tempest  heavy  pieces  of  ar¬ 
tillery  were  removed  from  their  places,  and  houses  and  su¬ 
gar  works  levelled  with  the  ground,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  trees,  and  every  thing  growing  above  ground,  must 
have  greatly  suffered.  This  was  the  case.  Great  numbers 
of  trees  and  plants  (which  commonly  resist  the  ordinary 
winds)  were  torn  out  by  the  roots.  The  canes  were  univer¬ 
sally  either  lodged,  or  twisted  about  as  if  by  a  whirlwind,  or 
torn  out  of  the  ground  altogether.  In  the  latter  case,  the 
breeding  ants,  with  their  progeny,  must  have  been  exposed 
to  inevitable  destruction  from  the  deluge  of  rain  which 
fell  at  the  same  time.  The  number  of  canes,  however, 
thus  torn  out  of  the  ground,  could  not  have  been  adequate 
to  the  sudden  diminution  of  the  sugar  ants;  but  it  is  easy 
to  conceive,  that  the  roots  of  canes,  which  remained  on  the 
ground,  and  the  earth  about  them,  were  so  agitated  and 
shaken,  and  at  the  same  time  the  ants’  nests  were  so  hro- 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  91 

ken  open  or  injured  by  the  violence  of  the  wind,  as  to  ad¬ 
mit  the  torrents  of  rain  accompanying  it.  I  apprehend 
therefore,  that  the  principal  destruction  of  these  ants  must 
have  been  thus  effected. 

It  must  not  however  be  denied,  that  though  nature,  for  a 
time,  may  permit  a  particular  species  of  animal  to  become 
so  disproportionably  numerous  as  to  endanger  some  other 
parts  of  her  works,  she  herself  will,  in  due  time,  put  a  check 
upon  the  too  great  increase;  and  that  is  often  done  by  an 
increase  of  some  other  animal  inimical  to  the  former  de¬ 
stroyers.  In  the  present  case,  however,  nothing  of  that 
sort  appeared ;  therefore,  when  a  plain  natural  cause,  obvi¬ 
ous  to  our  senses,  occurred,  by  which  we  can  account  for 
the  amazing  and  sudden  decrease  of  those  ruinous  insects, 
it  is  unnecessary  to  recur  to  other  possible  causes  too  mi¬ 
nute  for  our  investigation. 

All  I  have  said  on  this  subject  would  certainly  be  of  lit¬ 
tle  or  no  consequence,  did  it  not  lead  to  the  true  method  of 
cultivating  the  sugar-cane  on  lands  infested  with  those  de¬ 
structive  insects ;  in  which  point  of  view,  however,  it  be¬ 
comes  important. 

If  then  the  above  doctrine  be  just,  it  follows,  that  the 
whole  of  our  attention  must  be  turned  to  the  destruction  of 
the  nests  of  these  ants,  and  consequently  the  breeding  ants 
with  their  eggs  or  young  brood. 

In  order  to  effect  this,  all  trees  and  fences,  under  the 
roots  of  which  these  ants  commonly  take  their  residence, 
should  first  be  grubbed  out;  particularly  lime  or  lemon  fen¬ 
ces,  which  are  very  common  in  Grenada,  and  which  generally 
suffered  from  the  ants  before  the  canes  appeared  in  the  least 
injured;  after  which  the  canes  should  be  stumped  out  with 
care,  and  the  stools  bu  nt  as  soon  as  possible,  together  with. 


92  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m. 

the  field  trash,  (or  the  dried  leaves  and  tops  of  the  canes),  in 
order  to  prevent  the  ants  from  making  their  escape  to  new 
quarters.  The  best  way  of  doing  this,  I  apprehend,  will 
be  to  gather  the  field  trash  together  in  considerable  heaps, 
and  to  throw  the  stools  as  soon  as  dug  out  of  the  ground 
into  them,  and  immediately  apply  fire.  By  this  means 
multitudes  must  be  destroyed;  for  the  field  trash,  when 
dry,  burns  with  great  rapidity.  The  land  should  then  be 
ploughed,  or  hoe-ploughed,  twice  (but  at  least  once)  in  the 
wettest  season  of  the  year,  in  order  to  admit  the  rains,  be¬ 
fore  it  is  hoed  for  planting  the  cane;  by  these  means  these 
insects,  I  apprehend,  will  be  so  much  reduced  in  number, 
as  at  least  to  secure  a  good  plant  cane. 

But  it  is  the  custom  in  most  of  the  West  India  islands  to 
permit  the  canes  to  ratoon ;  that  is,  after  the  canes  have  once 
been  cut  down  for  the  purpose  of  making  sugar,  they  are 
suffered  to  grow  up  again  without  replanting  ;  and  this  ge¬ 
nerally  for  three  or  four  years,  but  sometimes  for  ten,  fif¬ 
teen,  or  twenty.  In  this  mode  of  culture  the  stools  become 
larger  every  year,  so  as  to  grow  out  of  the  ground  to  a  con¬ 
siderable  height,  and  by  that  means  afford  more  and  more 
shelter  to  the  ants’  nests ;  therefore  for  two  or  three  succes¬ 
sive  crops  the  canes  should  be  replanted  yearly,  sp  as  not  only 
to  afford  as  little  cover  as  possible  for  the  ants’  nests,  but 
continually  to  disturb  such  ants  as  may  have  escaped,  in  the 
business  of  propagating  their  species. 

That  considerable  expense  and  labour  will  attend  pat¬ 
ting  this  method  into  execution  there  is  no  doubt.  An  ex¬ 
pensive  cure,  however,  is  better  than  none;  but  from  the 
genera!  principles  of  agriculture,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the 
planter  will  be  amply  repaid  for  his  trouble  by  the  good¬ 
ness  of  his  crops,  in  consequence  of  the  superior  tilth  the 
land  will  receive  in  the  proposed  method. 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES. 


CHAPTER  III. 


ST.  VINCENT  and  its  DEPENDENCIES , 


AND 


DOMINICA. 


HE  civil  history  of  these  islands  may  be  com- 


A  prised  in  a  narrow  compass;  for  the  sove¬ 
reignty  of  them  having  been  long  an  object  of  dis¬ 
pute  between  the  crowns  of  Great  Britain  and 
France,  the  rightful  possessors,  the  Charaibes,  de¬ 
rived  that  security  from  the  reciprocal  envy  and 
avarice  of  the  contending  parties,  which  they  might 
have  expected  in  vain  from  their  justice  and  huma¬ 
nity.  As  both  St.  Vincent  and  Dominica  were  in¬ 
cluded,  with  many  other  islands,  in  the  earl  of  Car¬ 
lisle’s  patent,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  attempts  were 
made,  at  different  times,  to  bring  them  under  the 
English  dominion.  These  attempts  the  French 
constantly  opposed,  with  design,  it  was  urged,  se¬ 
cretly,  and  surreptitiously  to  occupy  the  islands 
themselves;  and  their  conduct  towards  the  Cha¬ 
raibes  on  other  occasions  seems  to  justify  the  sug¬ 
gestion. 


94 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  in. 

But,  whatever  might  have  been  their  motives, 
they  exerted  themselves  with  such  effect,  that  the 
English  were  compelled  to  relinquish  all  hopes  of 
obtaining  these  islands  by  force; — for  by  the  treaty 
of  Aix  la  Chapelle  (1748),  St.  Vincent,  Dominica, 
St.  Lucia,  and  Tobago,  were  declared  neutral,  and 
the  ancient  proprietors  (such  as  remained  of  them) 
were  at  length  left  in  unmolested  possession. 

The  disputes  and  hostilities  which  these  at¬ 
tempts  of  the  English  on  the  one  hand,  and  resist¬ 
ance  of  the  French  on  the  other,  gave  rise  to  in  this 
part  of  the  world,  are  no  longer  interesting,  and 
therefore  need  not  be  brought  again  to  remem¬ 
brance  :  The  depravity  and  injustice  of  mankind  are 
at  all  times  subjects  of  unpleasing  speculation.  But 
the  subsequent  conduct  of  both  nations,  respecting 
the  islands  which  they  had  declared  neutral,  is  too  re¬ 
markable  to  be  overlooked,  even  if  historical  preci¬ 
sion  did  not,  as  in  the  present  case  it  does,  require 
me  to  relate  the  circumstances  attending  it. 

The  treaty  of  neutrality  was  no  sooner  conclu¬ 
ded,  than  both  English  and  French  appeared  dis¬ 
satisfied  with  the  arrangement  which  they  had 
made.  The  latter  seem  not  to  have  considered 
until  it  was  too  late,  that  by  restricting  the  English 
from  the  occupancy  of  those  countries,  on  the 
ground  of  right  in  a  third  party,  they  precluded 
themselves  at  the  same  time.  The  English,  on  the 
other  hand,  discovered  that,  by  acceding  to  the 
compromise,  they  had  given  up  St.  Lucia,  an  island 


95 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES. 

worth  all  the  rest,  and  to  which  it  must  be  owned 
we  had  some  colourable  pretensions,  founded  on  a 
treaty  entered  into  with  the  Charaibean  inhabitants 
in  1664,  six  hundred  of  whom  attended  an  arma¬ 
ment  that  was  sent  thither  by  lord  Willoughby,  and 
actually  put  the  English  publicly  and  formally  into 
possession. 

Both  nations  being  thus  alike  dissatisfied  with  an 
arrangement  which  left  nothing  to  either,  it  may 
be  supposed,  that  on  the  conclusion  of  the  war 
which  broke  out  a  few  years  afterwards,  a  very  dif¬ 
ferent  stipulation  took  place.  The  French  no  long¬ 
er  pleaded  scruples  on  behalf  of  the  Charaibes,  but 
very  cordially  concurred  with  the  English  in  di¬ 
viding  the  spoil.  By  the  9th  article  of  the  peace 
of  Paris,  signed  the  10th  of  February  1763,  the 
three  islands  of  Dominica,  St.  Vincent,  and  Toba¬ 
go,  were  assigned  to  Great  Britain;  and  St.  Lucia 
to  France,  in  full  and  perpetual  sovereignty;  the 
Charaibes  not  being  once  mentioned  in  the  whole 
transaction,  as  if  no  such  people  existed. 

They  were  in  truth  reduced  to  a  miserable  rem¬ 
nant. — Of  the  ancient,  or,  as  they  were  called  by 
the  English,  Red  Charaibes,  not  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  families  survived  in  1763,  and  of  all  their  anci¬ 
ent  and  extensive  possessions,  these  poor  people 
retained  only  a  mountainous  district  in  the  island  of 
St.  Vincent.  Of  this  island  and  its  dependencies  I 
shall  now  treat,  reserving  Dominica  for  a  separate 
section. 


96 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 


SECTION  I. 

ST.  VINCENT. 

«  The  Spaniards  (says  Doctor  Campbell)  be- 
«  stowed  the  name  of  St.  Vincent  upon  this  island, 
«  because  they  discovered  it  upon  the  22d  of  .fa¬ 
ff  nuary,  which  in  their  calendar  is  St.  Vincent’s 
“  day,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  they  were  ever, 
«  properly  speaking,  in  possession  of  it;  the  Indi- 
«  ans  being  very  numerous  here,  on  account  of  its 
“  being  the  rendezvous  of  their  expeditions  to  the 
<c  continent.”  Unfortunately,  however,  neither 
their  numbers,  nor  the  natural  strength  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  exempted  them  from  hostility.  What  avarice 
had  in  vain  attempted,  accident  accomplished,  by 
procuring  an  establishment  among  them  for  a  race 
of  people,  whom,  though  at  first  beheld  by  the 
native  Charaibes  with  contempt  or  pity,  they  have 
since  found  formidable  rivals  and  merciless  con¬ 
querors.  These  people  have  been  long  distin¬ 
guished,  however  improperly,  by  the  name  of 
Black  Charaibes. 

Of  the  origin  of  these  intruders,  and  their  anci¬ 
ent  connection  with  the  native  Charaibes,  the  best 
account  that  I  have  been  able  to  find  is  in  a  small 
treatise  of  the  author  above  quoted  (Doctor  Camp- 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES.  97 

bell)  intitled  “  Candid  and  impartial  Considerations 
on  the  Nature  of  the  Sugar-trade,”  which  being 
equally  authentic  and  curious,  I  shall  present  to  my 
readers  entire;  and  with  the  less  scruple,  because 
it  consists  chiefly  of  an  official  paper  which  cannot 
be  abridged  without  injury. 

ef  In  1672,  king  Charles  thought  fit  to  divide 
these  governments,  and  by  a  new  commission  ap¬ 
pointed  lord  Willoughby  governor  of  Barbadoes, 
St.  Lucia,  St.  Vincent,  and  Dominica;  Sir  William 
Stapleton  being  appointed  governor  of  the  other 
Leeward  Isles,  and  this  separation  has  subsisted 
ever  since,  the  same  islands  being  constantly  insert¬ 
ed  in  every  new  governor’s  patent.  On  the  demise 
ot  lord  Willoughby,  Sir  Jonathan  Atkins  was  ap¬ 
pointed  governor  of  Barbadoes,  and  the  rest  of 
these  islands,  and  so  continued  till  1680,  when  he 
was  succeeded  by  Sir  Richard  Dutton,  who  being 
sent  for  to  England  in  1685,  appointed  colonel  Ed¬ 
win  Stede  lieutenant  governor,  who  vigorously  as¬ 
serted  our  rights  by  appointing  deputy  governors 
for  the  other  islands;  and  particularly  sent  captain 
Temple  hither  to  prevent  the  French  from  wooding 
and  watering  without  our  permission,  to  which 
they  had  been  encouraged  by  the  inattention  of 
the  former  governors;  persisting  steadily  in  this 
conduct,  till  it  was  signified  to  him,  as  we  have  had 
occasion  to  remark  before,  that  the  king  had  signed 
an  act  of  neutrality,  and  that  commissioners  were 
appointed  by  the  two  courts,  to  settle  all  differences 
relative  to  these  islands. 

VoL  TI.  n 


9§  HISTORY  OF  THE  [boor  m. 

“  Some  years  after,  a  ship  from  Guinea,  with  a 
large  cargo  of  slaves,  was  either  wrecked  or  run 
on  shore  upon  the  island  of  St.  Vincent,  into  the 
woods  and  mountains  of  which  great  numbers  of 
the  negroes  escaped.*  Here,  whether  willingly 
or  unwillingly  is  a  little  uncertain,  the  Indians  suf¬ 
fered  them  to  remain,  and  partly  by  the  accession 
of  runaway  slaves  from  Barbadoes,  partly  by  the 
children  they  had  by  the  Indian  women,  they  be¬ 
came  very  numerous;  so  that  about  the  beginning 
of  the  current  century  they  constrained  the  Indians 
to  retire  into  the  north-west  part  of  the  island. 
These  people  as  may  be  reasonably  supposed,  were 
much  dissatisfied  with  this  treatment;  and  com¬ 
plained  of  it  occasionally  both  to  the  English  and  to 
the  French,  that  came  to  wood  and  water  amongst 
them.  The  latter  at  length  suffered  themselves  to 
be  prevailed  upon  to  attack  these  invaders,  in  the 
cause  of  their  old  allies;  and  from  a  persuasion 
that  they  should  find  more  difficulty  in  dealing 
with  these  negroes,  in  case  they  were  suffered 
to  strengthen  themselves,  than  with  the  Indians. 

*  I  am  informed  by  Sir  William  Young,  who  is  perfectly  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  these  people,  that  they  were  originally  a  race  of  Mocoes, 
a  tube  or  nation  from  the  Bight  of  Benin.  They  were  wrecked  on 
the  coast  of  Bequin,  a  small  island  about  two  leagues  from  St.  Vin¬ 
cent,  in  the  year  1675,  and  were  afterwards  joined  by  great  numbers 
of  fugitive  negroes-  from  the  other  islands.  The  Red  Cbaraibes  first 
kept  them  in  slavery;  but  finding  their  numbers  increase,  came  to  a 
resolution  to  put  to  death  all  their  maie  children;  upon  which  the 
blacks  rose  on  their  masters,  who  by  degrees  have  almost  all  perished 
in  the  contest. 


■99 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES. 

After  much  deliberation,  in  the  year  1719,  they 
came  with  a  considerable  force  from  Martinico,  and 
landing  without  much  opposition,  began  to  burn 
the  negro  huts  and  destroy  their  plantations,  sup¬ 
posing  that  the  Indians  would  have  attacked  them 
in  the  mountains,  which  if  they  had  done,  the 
blacks  had  probably  been  extirpated,  or  forced  to 
submit  and  become  slaves.  But  either  from  fear 
or  policy,  the  Indians  did  nothing,  and  the  negroes 
sallying  in  the  night,  and  retreating  in  the  day  to 
places  inaccessible  to  the  whites,  destroyed  so  many 
of  the  French,  (amongst  whom  was  Mr.  Pan  ham 
major  of  Martinique,  who  commanded  them),  that 
they  were  forced  to  retire.  When  by  this  experi¬ 
ment  they  were  convinced  that  force  would  not  do, 
they  had  recourse  to  fair  means,  and  by  dint  of  per¬ 
suasions  and  presents,  patched  up  a  peace  with  the 
negroes  as  well  as  the  Indians,  from  which  they  re¬ 
ceived  great  advantage. 

“  Things  were  in  this  situation  when  captain 
Uring  came  with  a  considerable  armament  to  take 
possession  of  St.  Lucia  and  this  island,  in  virtue  of 
a  grant  from  our  late  sovereign  king  George  I.  to 
the  late  duke  of  Montague.  When  the  French 
had  dislodged  this  gentleman,  by  a  superior  force 
from  St.  Lucia,  he  sent  captain  Braithwaite  to  try 
what  could  be  done  at  St.  Vincent,  in  which  he 
was  not  at  all  more  successful,  as  will  best  appear 
from  that  gentleman’s  report  to  Mr.  Lring,  which, 
as  it  contains  several  curious  circumstances  relative 
to  the  country,  and  to  the  two  independent  nations 


joo  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m. 

who  then  inhabited  it,  belongs  properly  to  this  sub¬ 
ject,  and  cannot  but  prove  entertaining  to  the  rea- 
der.  The  paper  is  without  date,  but  it  appears  from 
Mr.  Uring’s  memoirs,  that  this  transaction  happen¬ 
ed  in  the  spring  of  the  year  1723.” 


“THE  REPORT. 

ie  In  pursuance  of  a  resolution  in  council,  and 
“  your  order  for  so  doing,  the  day  you  sailed  with 
•c  his  grace’s  colony  for  Antego,  I  sailed  with  the 
(t  Griffin  sloop,  in  company  with  his  majesty’s  ship 
the  Winchelsea,  to  St.  Vincent.  We  made  the 
<c  island  that  night,  and  next  morning  run  along 
£C  shore,  and  saw  several  Indian  huts,  but  as  yet  no 
“  Indians  came  off  to  us,  nor  could  we  get  ashore 
(f  to  them,  by  reason  there  was  no  ground  to  an- 
<c  chor  in.  Towards  the  evening,  two  Indians 
“  came  on  board,  and  told  us,  we  might  anchor  in 
a  bay  to  the  leeward,  and  when  we  were  at  an- 
“  chor  they  would  bring  their  general  on  board. 
“  Here  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  deep  water,  and 
“  very  dangerous  for  the  sloop.  One,  whom  they 
“  call  general,  came  on  board,  with  several  others, 
<£  to  the  number  of  twenty-two.  I  entertained 
fC  them  very  handsomely,  and  made  the  chief  some 
“  trifling  presents,  but  found  he  was  a  person  of 
f£  no  consequence,  and  that  they  called  him  chief 
“  to  get  some  present  from  me.  Here  two  of 
■(  the  Indians  were  so  drunk  they  would  not  go. 
£C  ashore,  but  staid  on  board  some  days,  and  were 


CHAP.  III.]  WEST  INDIES.  ior 

44  well  entertained.  After  this,  little  winds  and 
44  great  currents  drove  us  off  for  several  days ;  but 
44  at  last  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  a  spacious  bay, 
<£  to  leeward  of  all  the  island,  the  draught  of  which 
44  1  ordered  to  be  taken  by  our  surveyor,  for  your 
44  better  understanding  the  place,  being  the  only 
44  one  where  a  settlement  could  be  made.  The 
44  ship  and  sloop  were  scarce  come  to  anchor,  be- 
44  fore  the  strand  of  the  shore  was  covered  with  In- 
44  dians,  and  among  them  we  could  discover  a 
44  white,  who  proved  to  be  a  Frenchman.  I  took 
44  captain  Watson  in  the  boat  with  me,  with  a 
44  Frenchman,  and  immediately  went  ashore.  As 
44  soon  as  I  came  amongst  them,  I  asked  them 
44  why  they  appeared  all  armed  ?  For  every  man 
44  had  cutlasses,  some  had  musquets,  pistols,  bows 
44  and  arrows,  &c.  They  with  very  little  ceremo- 
44  mony  inclosed  me,  and  carried  me  up  the  conn- 
44  try  about  a  mile,  over  a  little  rivulet,  where  I 
44  was  told  I  was  to  see  their  general.  I  found  him 
44  sitting  amidst  a  guard  of  about  a  hundred  Indians, 
44  those  nearest  his  person  had  musquets,  the  rest 
44  bows  and  arrows,  and  great  silence.  He  order- 
44  ed  me  a  seat,  and  a  Frenchman  stood  at  his  right 
44  hand,  for  an  interpreter:  he  demanded  of  me, 
44  what  brought  me  into  his  country,  and  of  what 
44  nation  ?  I  told  him  English,  and  I  was  put  in  to 
44  wood  and  water,  as  not  caring  to  say  any  thing 
44  else  before  the  Frenchman;  but  told  him  if  lie 
44  would  be  pleased  to  come  on  board  our  ships,  I 
44  would  leave  Englishmen  in  hostage  for  him  and 
ff  those  he  should  be  pleased  to  bring  with  him; 


102 


HISTORY  OF  THE  .  [book  hi. 

44  but  I  could  not  prevail  with  him  either  to  come 
44  on  board,  or  suffer  me  to  have  wood  and  water. 
44  He  said  he  was  informed  we  were  come  to 
44  force  a  settlement,  and  we  had  no  other  way  to 
44  remove  that  jealousy  but  to  get  under  sail.  As 
44  soon  as  I  found  what  influence  the  Frenchman’s 
44  company  had  upon  them,  I  took  my  leave,  after 
44  making  such  replies  as  I  thought  proper,  and  re- 
44  turned  to  my  boat  under  a  guard.  When  I  came 
44  to  the  shore  I  found  the  guard  there  were  in- 
44  creased  by  a  number  of  negroes,  all  armed  with 
44  fuzees.  I  got  in  my  boat,  without  any  injury,  and 
44  went  on  board  to  captain  Orme,  and  told  him 
44  my  ill  success. 

44  Immediately  after,  I  sent  on  shore  the  ship’s 
44  boat  with  a  mate,  with  rum,  beef  and  bread, 
44  &c.  with  some  cutlasses,  and  ordered  a  French- 
44  man  who  went  with  the  mate,  to  desire  the  guard 
44  to  conduct  them  to  their  general,  and  to  tell  him, 
44  that  though  he  denied  me  the  common  good  of 
44  water  and  a  little  useless  wood,  nevertheless,  I 
44  had  sent  him  such  refreshments  as  our  ships  af~ 
44  forded.  Our  people  found  the  Frenchman  gone, 
44  and  that  then  the  Indian  general  seemed  pleased 
44  and  received  what  was  sent  him,  and  in  return 
44  sent  me  bows  and  arrows.” 

“  Our  people  had  not  been  long  returned  before 
44  their  general  sent  a  canoe,  with  two  chief  Indi- 
44  ans,  who  spoke  very  good  French,  to  thank  me 
44  for  my  presents,  and  to  ask  pardon  for  his  refu- 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES.  ioj 

«  sing  me  wood  and  water,  and  assured  me  I  might 
“  have  what  I  pleased  j  and  they  had  orders  to  tell 
“  me  if  I  pleased  to  go  ashore  again,  they  were  to 
remain  hostages  fof  my  civil  treatment.  I  sent 
“  them  on  board  the  man  of  war,  and  with  captain 
Watson  went  on  shore.  I  was  well  received 
<c  and  conducted  as  before.  But  now  I  found  the 
“  brother  of  the  chief  of  the  negroes  was  arrived* 
fe  with  five  hundred  negroes,  most  armed  with 
<e  fuzees.  They  told  my  interpreter  they  were  as- 
“  sured  we  were  come  to  force  a  settlement,  or 
“  else  they  would  not  have  denied  me  what  they 
“  never  before  denied  any  English,  viz.  wood  and 
“  water:  But  if  I  pleased,  I  might  take  in  what  I 
“  wanted  under  a  guard.  Finding  them  in  so  good 
<c  a  humour,  I  onee  more  introduced  the  desire  1 
“  had  to  entertain  them  on  board  our  ships,  and 
“  with  some  difficulty  prevailed  with  them,  by 
“  leaving  captain  Watson  on  shore  under  their 
<c  guard  as  a  hostage.  I  carried  them  on  board  the 
“  king’s  ship,  where  they  were  well  entertained  by 
“  captain  Qrme,  wffio  gave  the  Indian  general  a 
tc  fine  fuzee  of  his  own,  and  to  the  chief  of  the 
<e  negroes  something  that  pleased  him.  Captain 
sc  Orme  assured  him  of  the  friendship  of  the  king 
“  of  England,  &c.  The  negroe  chief  spoke  ex- 
celient  French,  and  gave  answers  with  the  French 
4<  compliments.  Afterwards  I  carried  them  on 
sc  board  the  Duke’s  sloop,  and  after  opening  their 
hearts  with  wine,  for  they  scorned  to  drink  rum, 
**  I  thought  it  a  good  time  to  tell  them  my  commis- 
**  slon,  and  what  brought  me  on  their  coast.  They 

w  4: 


104 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii, 

<s  told  me  it  was  well  I  had  not  mentioned  it  ashore, 
fc  for  their  power  could  not  have  protected  me; 
s£  that  it  was  impossible  ;  the  Dutch  had  before  at- 
*s  tempted  it,  but  were  glad  to  retire.  They  like- 
“  wise  told  me,  two  French  sloops  had  the  day  be- 
"  fore  we  came,  been  amongst  them,  gave  them 
“  arms  and  ammunition,  and  assured  them  of  the 
tc  whole  force  of  Martinico  for  their  protection 
sc  against  us.  They  told  them  also,  that  they  had 
tf  drove  us  from  St.  Lucia,  and  that  now  we  were 
u  come  to  endeavour  to  force  a  settlement  there  ; 
iC  and  notwithstanding  all  our  specious  pretences, 
te  when  we  had  power,  we  should  enslave  them; 
<c  but  declared  they  would  trust  no  Europeans ;  that 
£C  they  owned  themselves  under  the  protection  of 
“  the  French,  but  would  as  soon  oppose  their  set- 
((  tling  amongst  them,  or  any  act  of  force  from  them, 
«  as  us,  as  they  had  lately  given  an  example,  by 
“  killing  several;  and  they  further  told  me,  it  was 
«  by  very  large  presents  the  French  ever  got  in  their 
«  favour  again;  but  they  resolved  never  to  put  it 
«  in  the  power  of  any  European  to  hurt  them. 

They  advised  me  to  think  what  they  said  was  an 
«  act  of  friendship.  This  being  all  I  could  get 
«  from  them,  I  dismissed  them  with  such  presents 
“  as  his  Grace  ordered  for  that  service,  with  a  dis- 
fe  charge  of  cannon,  and  received  in  return  as  re~ 
«  gular  vollies  of  small  shot  as  I  ever  heard.  In 
se  the  night  the  Winchelsea  drove  from  her  anchors, 
<c  which  as  soon  as  I  perceived,  and  had  received 
*£  captain  Watson  from  the  shore,  I  got  under  sail, 
<£  and  stood  to  the  man  of  war." 


chap.  m.j  WEST  INDIES.  io$ 

Such  is  the  history  of  a  very  weak  and  fruitless 
attempt  which  was  made  under  the  authority  of  the 
British  government,  to  obtain  possession  of  this 
island  in  the  year  1723:  an  interval  of  forty  years 
succeeds*  in  which  I  find  no  occurrence  in  its  histo¬ 
ry  that  deserves  recital  The  country  continued  to 
be  a  theatre  of  savage  hostilities  between  the  ne¬ 
groes  and  the  Charaibes,  in  which  it  is  believed 
that  the  former  were  generally  victorious*  it  is  cer¬ 
tain  that  they  proved  so  in  the  end,  their  numbers, 
in  1763*  being  computed  at  two  thousand  *  where¬ 
as,  of  the  red  or  native  Charaibes*  there  were  not 
left  (as  hath  already  been  observed)  more  than  one 
hundred  families*  and  most  of  these,  if  I  am  right¬ 
ly  informed,  are  by  this  time  exterminated.  It  is 
however  worthy  of  remark*  that  the  African  in¬ 
truders  have  adopted  most  of  the  Charaibean  man¬ 
ners  and  customs  *  among  the  rest,  the  practice  of 
flattening  the  foreheads  of  their  infants,  as  descri¬ 
bed  in  the  first  part  of  this  work,  and,  perhaps,  it 
was  chiefly  from  this  circumstance  that  they  acqui¬ 
red  the  appellation  of  the  black  Charaibes. 

The  first  measure  of  the  English  government  in 
respect  to  this  island,  after  the  peace  of  Paris,  was 
to  dispose  of  the  lands — I  dare  not  say  to  the  best 
advantage*  for  no  less  than  24*000  acres,  being  more 
than  one-fourth  part  of  the  whole  country,  were 
gratuitously  assigned  over  to  two  individuals.* 

*  Mr,  Swinburne  had  twenty  thousand  acres,  and  general  Mon'ck- 
ton  Four  thousand;  but  from  the  disputes  which  aferwards  arose  with 
the  Charaibes,  I  believe  they  did  cot  derive  ali  the  benefit  from  those 
grants  which  they  expected. 

Voi.  ir. 


o 


tp6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  nr. 

The  remainder  was  ordered  to  be  sold  for  the  be¬ 
nefit  of  the  public,  and  20,538  acres  were  ac¬ 
cordingly  disposed  of  by  auction,  for  the  sum  of 
*£’,162,854  11s,  7d.  sterling.*  As  nearly  one  half 
the  country  was  judged  unfit  for  any  profitable  cul¬ 
tivation,  these  grants  and  sales  comprehended  all 
the  lands,  of  any  kind  of  value,  from  one  end  of 
the  island  to  the  other.  The  commissioners  indeed 
were  directed  not  to  survey  or  dispose  of  any  of 
the  lands  inhabited  or  claimed  by  the  Charaibes, 
until  they  should  receive  further  instructions  from 
the  crown ;  but  as  it'  was  impossible  to  ascertain 
how  far  the  claims  of  these  people  extended,  the 
survey  alone  was  postponed,  and  the  sales  were 
suffered  to  proceed,  to  the  amount  that  I  have 
mentioned;  no  doubt  being  entertained  by  the 
several  purchasers,  that  the  British  government 
would  ratify  the  acts  of  its  commissioners,  and  put 


*  The  Lords  of  the  Treasury  fixed  a  minimum,  below  which  no 
land  could  be  sold,  which  was  £  5  sterling  per  acre  for  every  acre  of 
cleared  land,  and  twenty  shillings  for  every  acre  in  wood  ;  and  the 
principal  conditions  of  sale  were  these,  “  that  every  purchaser  should 
pay  down  twenty  per  cent,  of  the  whole  purchase  money,  together 
with  six-pence  sterling  per  acre,  for  the  expense  of  surveying  the  land, 
and  that  the  remainder  of  the  purchase  money  should  be  secured  by 
bonds  ;  to  be  paid  by  equal  instalments  in  the  space  of  five  years  next 
after  the  date  of  the  grant.  That  each  purchaser  should  keep  on  the 
lands  so  by  h  m  purchased,  one  white  man  or  two  white  women,  for 
every  hundred  acres  of  land,  as  it  became  cleared,  for  the  purpose  of 
iultivating  the  same;  or  in  default  thereof,  or  non-payment  of  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  purchase  money,  the  lands  were  to  be  forfeited  to  the 
crown.”  Some  of  the  lands  sold  extravagantly  high,  as  far  as  fifty 
founds  sterling  per  acre. 


.chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  ,107 

them  into  possession  of  the  lands  which  they  had 
bought,  without  any  regard  to  the  claims  of  the 
Charaibes,  which  in  truth  the  purchasers  seem  to 
have  considered  as  of  no  consequence  or  validity. 

Of  the  measures  which  the  British  ministers  af¬ 
terwards  adopted  with  regard  to  these  people,  I 
have  spoken  in  the  former  editions  .of  this  work 
harshly  and  incorrectly ;  and  I  feel  no  disgrace  in 
retracting  involuntary  error.  The  representation 
which  I  gave,  had,  however,  the  good  effect,  of 
calling  forth  an  historical  account  of  those  mea¬ 
sures,  from  my  most  respectable  friend  Sir  William 
Young,  Bart,  founded  .on  official  papers  and  origi¬ 
nal  documents  in  his  possession,  and  drawn  up  with 
all  that  candour  and  perspicuity  which  were  to  have 
been  expected  from  its  author’s  distinguished  cha¬ 
racter  and  talents. 

As  the  subject  is  no  longer  interesting  to  the 
public,  I  need  only  observe,  that  if  the  claim  of 
the  British  crown  to  the  sovereignty  of  this  coun¬ 
try  was  originally  just  and  valid,  then  I  do  readily 
acknowledge,  that  the  measures  pursued  by  the 
British  administration  to  enforce  tbaT  claim,  were 
as  lenient  and  considerate  as  the  case  could  possi¬ 
bly  allow;  and  I  was  misinformed  when  I  gave  a 
different  representation.  Nevertheless,  I  will  not 
sacrifice,  even  on  the  shrine  of  friendship,  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  historical  narration,  by  asserting  that  my 
friend  has  entirely  convinced  me,  that  the  preten¬ 
sions  of  Great  Britian  were  originally  founded  on 


3o8  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  in, 

any  other  plea  than  that  of  political  expediency, 
I  am  here  speaking  of  the  British  claim,  as  against 
the  actual  possessors  of  the  country ,  the  black  Cha- 
raibcs.  This  claim,  no  cession  or  abandonment  on 
the  part  of  France  could  have  strengthened;  inas¬ 
much,  as  Great  Britain  herself  constantly  disputed 
the  pretensions  of  that  crown  to  the  neutral  islands; 
St.  Vincent’s  among  the  rest.  The  Charaibes  them¬ 
selves,  as  the  report  above  quoted  demonstrates, 
and  as  my  friend  admits,  uniformly  and  absolutely 
denied  any  right  in  any  of  the  sovereigns  of  Europe 
to  their  allegiance.  They  averred  that  they  knew 
no  king,  and  would  acknowledge  none.  They  said 
they  had  originally  been  landed  on  the  island  by 
shipwreck,  and  held  it  not  only  by  right  of  con¬ 
quest  over  the  aborigines,  but  also  by  actual  pos¬ 
session  for  near  a  century.”  Such  was  their  title 
to  St.  Vincent’s,  and  it  would  have  been  difficult, 
I  think,  for  any  nation  in  Europe  to  produce  a  bet¬ 
ter. 

Happily,  by  the  temperate  councils  and  the  hu¬ 
mane  interposition  of  the  civil  commissioners  em¬ 
ployed  by  government  to  dispose  of  the  lands,  the 
contest  with  these  people  (not  however  until  hos¬ 
tilities  had  been  commenced  and  many  lives  sacri¬ 
ficed)  was  at  length  finally  compromised  and  ad¬ 
justed,  to  the  satisfaction,  as  it  was  then  hoped,  of 
the  contending  parties.  A  treaty  of  peace  and 
friendship  was  concluded  with  them  on  the  27th 
February  1773;  the  articles  of  which  I  have  sub¬ 
joined  in  an  appendix  to  this  chapter. 


» 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  109 

By  this  treaty  the  situation  of  the  Charaibes,  in 
Respect  to  the  crown  of  Great  Britain,  was  defined 
and  clearly  expressed ;  and  I  admit,  that  their  fu¬ 
ture  conduct  was  to  be  tried  by  the  terms  of  it. 

On  the  19th  of  June  1779,  St.  Vincent’s  shared 
the  common  fate  of  most  of  the  British  West  In¬ 
dian  possessions,  in  that  unfortunate  war  with 
America,  which  swallowed  up  all  the  resources  of 
the  nation,  being  captured  by  a  small  body  of 
troops  from  Martinicq,  consisting  of  only  four  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  men,  commanded  by  a  lieutenant  in 
the  French  navy.  The  black  Charaibes  however, 
notwithstanding  the  treaty  of  1773,  immediately 
joined  the  enemy,  and  there  is  no  doubt,  that  the 
terror  which  seized  the  British  inhabitants,  from  an 
apprehension  that  those  people  would  proceed  to 
the  most  bloody  enormities,  contributed  to  the  very 
easy  victory  which  was  obtained  by  the  invaders; 
for  the  island  surrendered  without  a  struggle.  The 
terms  of  capitulation  were  favourable,  and  the 
island  was  restored  to  the  dominion  of  Great  Bri¬ 
tain  by  the  general  pacification  of  1783.  It  con¬ 
tained  at  that  time  sixty  one  sugar  estates,  five 
hundred  acres  in  coffee,  two  hundred  acres  in  ca¬ 
cao,  four  hundred  in  cotton,  fifty  in  indigo,  and 
jive  hundred  in  tobacco,  besides  lands  appropriated 
to  the  raising  provisions,  such  as  plantains,  yams, 
maize,  &c.  All  the  rest  of  the  country,  except¬ 
ing  the  few  spots  that  had  been  cleared  from  time 
to  time  by  the  Charaibes,  retained  its  native  woods, 
and  most  of  it,  I  believe,  continues  in  the  same 
state  to  the  present  hour. 


I IO 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  hi. 

It  is  remarkable  that  no  stipulation  was  made  by 
the  French  government  on  this  occasion,  on  behalf 
of  their  allies  the  Charaibes,  whom  they  had  sedu¬ 
ced  from  their  allegiance ;  and  it  therefore  reflects 
great  honour,  both  on  the  British  government  and 
the  resident  planters,  that  no  advantage  was  taken 
of  their  misconduct.  The  Charaibes,  even  those 
who  had  been  the  most  active  in  the  war,  were 
permitted  to  return  peaceably  to  their  possessions 
and  occupations.  They  were  treated  as  an  igno¬ 
rant  and  deluded  people ;  as  objects  of  compassion, 
not  of  vengeance ;  and  it  was  prudently  and  gene¬ 
rously  agreed,  as  by  common  consent,  to  bury  all 
past  offences  and  causes  of  complaint  in  oblivion, 

St.  Vincent’s  contains  about  84,000  acres,  which 
are  every  where  well  watered,  but  the  country  is 
very  generally  mountainous  and  rugged;  the  inter¬ 
mediate  vallies,  however,  are  fertile  in  a  high  de¬ 
gree,  the  soil  consisting  chiefly  of  a  fine  mould, 
composed  of  sand  and  clay,  well  adapted  for  sugar. 
The  extent  of  country  at  present  possessed  by  Bri¬ 
tish  subjects  is  23,605  acres,  and  about  as  much 
more  is  supposed  to  be  held  by  the  Charaibes.  All 
the  remainder  is  thought  to  be  incapable  of  culti¬ 
vation  or  improvement. 

The  island,  or  rather  .the  British  territory  within 
it,  is  divided  into  five  parishes,  of  which  only  one 
was  provided  with  a  church,  and  that  was  blown 
down  in  the  hurricane  of  1780;  whether  it  is  re¬ 
built  I  am  not  informed.  There  is  one  town,  calf 


chap,  hi*]  WEST  INDIES.  in 

ed  Kingston,  the  capital  of  the  island,  and  the  seat 
of  its  government,  and  three  villages  that  bear  the 
name  of  towns,  but  they  are  inconsiderable  ham¬ 
lets,  consisting  each  of  a  few  houses  only. 

But  the  public  establishment  that  reflects  the 
greatest  honour  on  St.  Vincent’s  is  its  celebrated 

O 

botanic  garden,  under  the  provident  and  well 
directed  care  of  Mr.  Anderson.  It  consists  of 
thirty  acres,  of  which  no  less  than  sixteen  are  in 
high  cultivation,  abounding  not  only  with  almost 
every  species  of  the  vegetable  world,  which  the 
hand  of  nature  has  bestowed  on  these  islands  for 
use  and  beauty,  for  food  and  luxury,  but  also  with 
many  valuable  exotics  from  the  East  Indies,  and 
South  America.— -If  it  be  surpassed  in  this  latter  re¬ 
spect,  by  the  magnificent  garden  of  Mr.  East,* 
it  claims  at  least  the  honour  of  seniority,  and  does 
infinite  credit  both  to  its  original  founders  and  pre¬ 
sent  directors. 

In  the  frame  of  its  government  and  the  admini¬ 
stration  of  executive  justice,  St.  Vincent’s  seems  to 
differ  in  no  respect  from  Grenada. — The  council 
consist  of  twelve  members,  the  assembly  of  seven¬ 
teen.  The  Governor’s  salary  (exclusive  of  fees  of 
office)  is  two  thousand  pounds  sterling,  of  which 
one  thousand  three  hundred  pounds  is  a  charge  up¬ 
on  the  fund  arising  from  the  duty  of  four  and  an 
half  per  centum.  The  remainder  is  by  grant  of 
the  assembly. 

*  In  Jamaica.  Seep.  zi2. 


U2  HISTORY  OF  THE  [boor  nu 

The  military  force  consists  at  present  of  a  regi¬ 
ment  of  infantry,  and  a  company  of  artillery,  sent 
from  England;  and  a  black  corps,  raised  in  the 
country — but  provided  for  with  the  former  on  the 
British  establishment,  and  receiving  no  additional 
pay  from  the  island.  The  militia  consists  of  two 
regiments  of  foot,  serving  without  pay  of  any  kind. 

The  number  of  inhabitants  appears,  by  the  last 
returns  to  government,  to  be  one  thousand  four 
hundred  and  fifty  whites,  and  eleven  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  fifty-three  negroes. 

Of  the  labour  of  these  people  I  have  no  other 
means  of  shewing  the  returns,  than  from  the  In¬ 
spector  General’s  account  of  the  exports  of  this 
island  for  1787,  a  table  of  which,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  other  islands,  is  subjoined.  In  this  table  how¬ 
ever,  I  conceive  is  comprehended  the  produce  ot 
the  several  islands  dependant  on  the  St.  V  incent’s 
government,  viz.  Bequia,  containing  3,700  acres. 
This  little  island  is  valuable  from  the  commodious¬ 
ness  of  its  fine  harbour,  called  Admiralty  bay ;  Uni¬ 
on,  containing  2,150  acres;  Canouane,  containing 
1,777  acres;  and  Mustique,  containing  about  1,203 
acres;*  the  negroes  employed  in  the  cultivation  of 
these  islands  (in  number  about  1 ,400)  being,  I  bej 
lieve,  included  in  the  11,853  before  mentioned. 

*  There  are  likewise  the  little  islots  of  Petit  Martinique,  Petit 
St.  Vincent,  Maillereau,  and  Balieseau,  each  of  which  produces  a 
little  cotton. 
chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES. 


SECTION  II. 

DOMINICA. 

THE  island  of  Dominica,  was  so  named  by 
Christopher  Columbus,  from  the  circumstance  of 
its  being  discovered  by  him  on  a  Sunday.*  My 
account  of  it  will  be  very  brief,  for  its  civil  history, 
like  that  of  St.  Vincent,  is  a  mere  blank  previous 
to  the  year  1759,  when  by  conquest  it  fell  under 
the  dominion  of  Great  Britain,  and  was  afterwards 
confirmed  to  the  British  crown,  by  the  treaty  of 
peace  concluded  at  Paris  in  February  1763. 

Notwithstanding  that  Dominica  had  until  that 
time  been  considered  as  a  neutral  island,  many  of 
the  subjects  of  France  had  established  coffee  plan¬ 
tations,  and  other  settlements,  in  various  parts  of 
the  country ;  and  it  reflects  honour  on  the  British 
administration,  that  these  people  were  secured  in 
their  possessions,  on  condition  of  taking  the  oaths 
of  allegiance  to  his  Britannic  majesty,  and  paying  a 
small  quit-rent. f  The  rest  of  the  cultivable  lands. 

*  November  3d,  1493.  It  was  the  first  land  which  he  discovered  in 
his  second  voyage,  after  having  been  twenty  days  at  sea  from  the  Ca¬ 
naries. 

•{-  The  crown  granted  them  leases,  some  for  fourteen,  and  others 
‘for  forty  years,  renewable  at  the  expiration  thereof,  with  conditions  in 


¥i6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

were  ordered  to  be  sold  on  the  same  conditions  as 
those  of  St.  Vincent,  by  commissioners  nominated 
for  that  purpose,  and  no  less  than  94,346  acres 
(comprehending  one  half  of  the  island)  were  accord¬ 
ingly  disposed  of  by  auction,  in  allotments  from 
fifty  to  one  hundred  acres,  yielding  the  sum  of 
<£.312,092.  1  is.  Id.  sterling  money  £ 

It  does  not  however  appear,  that  the  purchases 
thus  made  by  British  subjects  have  answered  the 
expectation  of  the  buyers;  for  the  French  inha¬ 
bitants  of  Dominica  are  still  more  numerous  than 
the  English,  and  possess  the  most  valuable  cof¬ 
fee  plantations  in  the  island,  the  produce  ot  which 
has  hitherto  been  found  its  most  important  staple- 
They  differ  but  little  in  manners,  customs,  and  re¬ 
ligion,  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  French 
islands  in  the  West  Indies,  and  their  priests  have 
been  hitherto  appointed  by  superiors  in  Martinico  ; 
to  the  government  of  which  island,  and  to  the  laws 

very  lease,  <s  that  the  possessor,  hk  heirs  or  assignes,  should  pay  to 
his  majesty,  his  heirs  or  successors,  the  sum  of  two  shillings,  sterling^ 
per  ann.  for  every  acre  of  land  of  which  the  lease  should  consist.”  And 
further,  “  that  they  should  not  sell  or  dispose  of  their  lands,  without 
the  consent  or  approbation  of  the  governor,  or  commander  in  chief  of 
that  island,  for  the  time  being.”  This  indulgence,  however,  did  not 
extend  to  more  than  three  hundred  acres  of  land  occupied  by  each 
French  subject. 

*  No  person  was  allowed  to  purchase,  either  in  his  own  name,  or  in 
the  name  of  others,  in  trust  for  him,  more  than  three  hundred  acres, 
if  in  Dominica,  or  five  hundred  acres  if  in  St.  Vincent. 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  117 

of  their  own  nation,  they  consider  themselves  to 
be  amenable. 

I  am  sorry  historical  justice  obliges  me  to  ob¬ 
serve,  that  the  liberal  conduct  of  the  British  go¬ 
vernment  towards  these  people,  after  they  became 
adopted  subjects,  did  not  meet  with  that  grateful 
return  from  them,  which,  for  the  general  interests 
of  mankind,  ought  to  be  religiously  manifested  on 
such  occasions. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  hopeless  and  de¬ 
structive  war  hetween  Great  Britain  and  her  co¬ 
lonies  in  North  America,  the  island  of  Dominica 
was  in  a  flourishing  situation.  The  port  of  Roseau 
having  been  declared  a  free  port  by  act  of  parlia¬ 
ment,  was  resorted  to  by  trading  vessels  from  most 
parts  of  the  foreign  West  Indies,  as  well  as  from 
America.  The  French  and  Spaniards  purchased 
great  numbers  of  negroes  there  for  the  supply  of 
their  settlements,  together  with  vast  quantities  of 
the  merchandize  and  manufactures  of  Great  Bri¬ 
tain;  payment  for  all  which  was  made  chiefly  in 
bullion,  indigo,  and  cotton,  and  completed  in 
mules  and  cattle;  articles  of  prime  necessity  to  the 
planter.* 

*  Roseau  is  still  a  free-port,  but  the  restrictions  and  regulations  cf 
the  late  act  are  so  rigid,  that  foreigners  are  discouraged  from  resort¬ 
ing  to  it,  and,  since  some  late  seizures,  consider  the  law  as  a  snare 
to  invite  them  to  rum. 


si8  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  in. 

Thus  the  island,  though  in  itself  certainly  not 
so  fertile  as  some  others  of  less  extent  in  its  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  was  becoming  very  rapidly  a  colony  of 
considerable  importance;  but,  unfortunately,  it 
wanted  that  protection  which  alone  could  give  its 
possessions  stability  and  value. 

To  those  who  recollect  the  frantic  rage  with 
which  all  the  faculties  and  means  of  Great  Britain 
were  directed  towards,  and  applied  in,  the  subju¬ 
gation  of  America,  the  utter  disregard  which  was 
manifested  by  the  then  administration  towards  the 
security  of  this,  and  the  other  British  islands  in  the 
West  Indies,  may  not,  perhaps,  be  matter  of  sur¬ 
prise  ;  but  it  will  hereafter  be  scarcely  believed, 
that  the  whole  regular  force  allotted,  during  the 
height  of  the  war,  for  the  protection  of  Dominica, 
consisted  of  no  more  than  six  officers  and  ninety 
four  privates !  This  shameful  neglect  was  the  more 
remarkable,  as  this  island,  from  its  local  situation, 
between  Martimco  and  Guadaloupe,  is  the  best 
calculated  of  all  the  possessions  of  Great  Britain  in 
that  part  of  the  world,  for  securing  to  her  the  do¬ 
minion  of  the  Charaibean  sea.  A  few  ships  of 
war  stationed  at  prince  Rupert’s  bay  would  effec¬ 
tually  stop  all  intercourse  of  the  French  settlements 
with  each  other,  as  every  vessel  is  liable  to  capture 
by  ships  cruizing  off  that  bay,  and  to  windward  of 
the  island.  This  indeed  was  discovered  when  it 
was  too  late. 


WEST  INDIES. 


SfiAP.  III.] 


4*9 


It  is  probable  that  this,  and  the  other  circum¬ 
stances  which  I  have  recounted,  namely,  the  grow¬ 
ing  prosperity  of  the  colony,  and  the  criminal  in¬ 
attention  of  the  British  Ministry  towards  its  secu¬ 
rity,  had  already  attracted  the  vigilant  rapaciousness 
of  the  French  government ;  but  it  is  asserted,  that 
many  of  the  inhabitants  within  the  colony,  who  had 
formerly  been  subjects  of  France,  scrupled  not,  on 
the  first  intimation  that  hostilities  had  been  com¬ 
menced  in  Europe,,  in  the  year  1778,  to  invite 
an  attack  from  Martinico.  Proof  of  this  may  not, 
perhaps,  easily  be  produced,  but  it  is  certain,  that 
their  subsequent  conduct  gave  too  much  cause  for 
such  a  suspicion. 


On  Monday  the  7th  of  September,  in  that  year, 
a  French  armament,  consisting  of  a  forty  gun  ship, 
three  frigates,  and  about  thirty  sail  of  armed  sloops 
and  schooners,  having  on  board  two  thousand  re¬ 
gular  troops,  and  a  lawless  banditti  of  volunteers, 
about  half  that  number,  appeared  off  the  island, 
under  the  command  of  the  Marquis  de  Bouille, 
governor  of  Martinico,  and  general  of  the  French 
windward  West  Indian  islands.  Part  of  the  troops 
having  soon  afterwards  landed  without  opposition, 
the  enemy  proceeded  to  the  attack  of  fort  Ca- 
shacrou,  the  chief  defence  ot  the  island,  and  in 
which  a  detachment  of  the  regulars  was  stationed. 
This  fort  was  built  on  a  rock,  about  three  hundred 
feet  in  perpendicular  height,  surrounded  on  tnree 
sides  by  the  sea,  and  was  considered  so  very  defen- 
sible,  that  it  was  supposed  a  few  hundred  men. 


120 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii* 

well  provided,  would  maintain  it  against  as  many 
thousands.  Great  therefore  was  the  astonishment 
of  the  English  in  the  town  of  Roseau,  in  percei¬ 
ving,  by  the  French  colours  flying  on  it,  that  this 
fort  had  surrendered  without  resistance ;  but  strange 
as  it  may  seem,  the  case  appeared  afterwards  to 
have  been,  that  some  of  the  French  inhabitants  had 
insinuated  themselves  into  the  fort  a  few  nights  be¬ 
fore,  and  having  intoxicated  with  liquor  the  few 
soldiers  that  were  there  on  duty,  had  contrived  to 
spike  up  the  cannon! 

Having  thus  made  themselves  masters  of  Fort 
Cashacrou,  the  enemy  landed  their  whole  force 
about  noon,  and  began  their  march  for  the  town, 
which  was  defended  by  fort  Melville,  and  three 
other  batteries;  but  unfortunately,  these  batteries 
were  ill  provided,  and  worse  manned.  The  whole 
number  of  the  militia  did  not  exceed  one  hundred 
and  twenty;  for  but  few  of  the  French  inhabitants 
thought  proper  to  assemble  ;  and  of  those  that 
made  their  appearance,  many  withdrew  themselves 
again,  and  were  no  mere  seen  until  the  island  had 
surrendered. 

The  small  force  however  that  was  collected,  be¬ 
haved  with  that  spirit  and  gallantry,  which  give 
room  to  lament  they  were  not  better  supported. 
Three  times  was  the  enemy  driven  out  of  fort 
Loubiere,  of  which  they  had  possessed  themselves 
in  their  march,  and  twice  were  the  colours  which 
they  had  hoisted  thereon  shot  away.  Their  com- 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  lit 

missary-general,  and  forty  of  their  soldiers,  were 
killed,  and  Bouille  himself  had  a  very  narrow 
escape ;  his  sword  being  shot  away  from  his  side.* 

But  gallantry  was  unavailing  against  such  supe¬ 
riority  of  numbers  ;  for  about  two  thousand  of  the 
French  having  gained  possession  of  the  heights 
above  Roseau,  this  last  circumstance  determined 
the  fate  of  the  island.  The  bravery  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants,  however,  obtained  for  them,  from  their  libe¬ 
ral  and  noble-minded  conqueror,  very  honourable 
terms  of  capitulation.  Besides  being  permitted  to 
march  out  with  all  military  honours,  they  were  al¬ 
lowed  to  retain  their  arms,  their  civil  government, 
and  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion,  laws,  cus¬ 
toms,  and  ordinances;  to  preserve  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  justice  in  the  same  persons  in  whom  it 
was  then  vested,  and  to  enjoy  their  possessions, 
of  what  nature  soever,  unmolested;  a  privilege 
which  was  expressly  extended  to  absent  as  well 
as  resident  proprietors. 

De  Bouille  having  thus  completed  his  conquest, 
departed  for  Martinico;  leaving  the  Marquis  Du- 
chilleau,  (a  man  of  a  far  different  character)  com¬ 
mander  in  chief  of  Dominica ;  whose  conduct,  during 
four  years  that  he  continued  in  the  island,  is  said  to 
have  been  so  wantonly  oppressive  and  tyrannical, 

#  Genera!  Bouille  himself  afterwards  affected  to  say,  that  he  lost 
no  men  in  the  attack  of  Fort  Loubiere,  except  the  commissary  gene¬ 
ral.  The  fact  however,  was  as  above  stated. 

Vol.  II. 


Q 


in  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iik. 

that  we  are  left  to  wonder  at  the  patient  long-suf¬ 
fering  and  forbearance  of  the  people  under  his  go¬ 
vernment,  in  submitting  to  it  for  half  the  time. 

His  first  measure  was  to  disarm  the  English  in¬ 
habitants,  in  direct  violation  of  the  capitulation,  and 
he  entered  into  a  treaty  with  the  runaway  negroes 
for  their  assistance,  if  wanted.  He  issued  an  or¬ 
der,  forbidding  the  English  to  assemble  together 
more  than  two  in  a  place,  and  he  commanded  the 
centinels  to  disperse  them  if  they  were  found  to¬ 
gether  in  greater  numbers.  He  ordered,  that  no 
lights  should  be  seen  in  their  houses  after  nine 
o’clock  at  night,  and  that  no  English  person  should 
presume  to  Walk  the  streets  after  that  hour,,  with¬ 
out  a  candle  and  lan thorn.  Mr.  Robert  How,  an 
English  merchant,  and  owner  of  a  ship  then  in  the 
bay,  attempting  to  go  on  board  his  own  vessel  after 
that  hour,  was  shot  dead  in  the  attempt ;  and  the 
centinel  who  killed  him  was  raised  to  a  higher 
station  in  his  regiment,  for  having  thus  (as  the  go¬ 
vernor  expressed  it)  done  his  duty. 

So  very  apprehensive  was  this  governor  that  the 
English  inhabitants  Were  forming  designs  to  retake 
the  island,  that  every  letter  of  theirs  was  opened  for 
his  inspection  before  it  was  delivered.  And  deem¬ 
ing  this  measure  insufficient  to  furnish  him  with 
the  knowledge  of  their  private  transactions,  he 
adopted  the  practice  of  going  himself  in  disguise, 
or  employing  others  who  better  knew  the  English, 
language,  in  order  to  listen  at  their  doors  and  win- 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES.  T23 

dows  in  the  night-time  to  the  conversation  which 
passed  in  domestic  intercourse. 

He  repeatedly  threatened  to  set  fire  to  the  town 
of  Roseau,  in  case  the  island  should  be  attacked , 
and,  though  this  was  never  attempted  by  the  En¬ 
glish  forces,  yet  that  town  was  set  fire  to  (as  it  was 
believed)  by  the  French  soldiers,  and  there  was 
every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  governor  was 
privy  to  it.  This  supposition  was  strongly  corrobo¬ 
rated  by  his  behaviour  on  the  night  of  that  melan¬ 
choly  scene,  at  which  he  himself  was  present  the 
best  part  of  the  time,  and  it  is  very  confidently  as¬ 
serted,  would  not  allow  his  soldiers  to  assist  in  ex¬ 
tinguishing  the  flames,  save  only,  in  houses  that  be¬ 
longed  to  the  French  inhabitants. 

V 

This  fire  happened  the  evening  of  Easter  Sunday, 
1781,  by  which  upwards  of  five  hundred  houses 
were  consumed  in  a  few  hours  ;  and  a  vast  quan¬ 
tity  of  rich  merchandize  and  effects  destroyed,  to 
the  value  of  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  ster¬ 
ling. 

While  the  wretched  inhabitants  were  thus  groan¬ 
ing  under  domestic  despotism,  they  had  no  re¬ 
sources  from  without.  There  trade  was  entirely 
cut  off,  insomuch,  that  during  five  years  and  three 
months,  the  time  that  the  island  of  Dominica  was 
in  possession  of  the  French,  it  was  not  resorted  to 
by  any  vessels  from  Old  France,  nor  was  any  of 
its  produce  exported  to  that  kingdom;  but  part  of 


124 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  m. 

it  was  sent  in  neutral  bottoms  to  the  Dutch  island 
of  St.  Eustatius,  before  its  capture  by  Admiral  Rod¬ 
ney,  and  from  thence  it  was  exported  to  England, 
under  the  most  extravagant  expenses  and  loss  to  the 
proprietors. 

Other  parts  of  their  produce  were  sent  in  Dutch 
vessels,  which  were  engaged  for  the  purpose  in 
England,  to  Rotterdam  ;  and  after  the  breaking  out 
of  the  war  with  the  Dutch,  the  produce  of  Domi¬ 
nica  was  sent  under  imperial  colours  to  Ostend, 
where  the  sugar  sold  from  six  to  eight  pounds  ster¬ 
ling  the  hogshead. 

These  accumulated  distresses  ended  in  the  abso¬ 
lute  ruin  of  many  of  the  planters,  and  no  less  than 
thirty  sugar  plantations  were  in  consequence  there¬ 
of,  thrown  up  and  abandoned  by  the  proprietors. 
At  length,  however,  the  day  of  deliverance  arrived; 
for,  in  the  month  of  January  1783,  Dominica  was 
restored  to  the  government  of  England.  The  joy 
which  on  this  event,  animated  the  bosom,  and  en¬ 
lightened  the  countenance  of  every  man,  whom 
painful  experience,  under  an  arbitrary  government, 
had  taught  to  set  a  right  value  on  the  British 
constitution,  may  be  conceived,  but  cannot  be  de¬ 
scribed.  The  inhabitants  were  now  restored  to  the 
full  enjoyment  of  their  former  privileges,  under  a 
civil  establishment,  similar  to  those  of  the  other 
British  colonies  in  the  West  Indies,  which  being- 
hereafter  to  be  described  at  length,  it  is  unneces¬ 
sary  to  enlarge  upon  in  this  place,  except  to  ob- 


125 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

serve,  that  the  legislative  authority  of  this  island  is 
vested  in  the  commander  in  chief,  a  council  of 
twelve  gentlemen,  and  an  assembly  of  nineteen 
members.*  The  few  observations  therefore  which 
follow,  concerning  its  present  state  and  produc¬ 
tions,  will  conclude  my  account. 

Dominica  contains  186,436  acres  of  land;  and  is 
divided  into  ten  parishes.  The  town  of  Roseau  is 
at  present  the  capital  of  the  island,  and  is  situate 
in  the  parish  of  St.  George,  being  about  seven 
leagues  from  Prince  Rupert’s  bay.  It  is  on  a  point 
of  land  on  the  S.W.  side  of  the  island  which  forms 
two  bays,  viz.  Woodbridge’s  bay  to  the  north,  and 
Charlotteville  bay  to  the  southward. 

Roseau  is  about  half  a  mile  in  length,  from 
Charlotteville  to  Roseau  river,  and  mostly  two 
furlongs  in  breadth,  but  less  in  some  parts,  being 
of  a  very  irregular  figure.  It  contains  not  more 
than  five  hundred  houses,  exclusive  of  the  cottages 
occupied  by  negroes.  Before  its  capture  by  the 
French,  it  contained  upwards  of  one  thousand. 

This  island  is  twenty-nine  miles  in  length,  and 

mav  be  reckoned  sixteen  miles  in  breadth.  It  con- 

* 

tains  many  high  and  rugged  mountains,  intersper¬ 
sed  with  fine  vallies,  and  in  general  they  appear  to 

*  The  governor’s  salary,  exclusive  of  his  fees  of  office,  is  £.1,300 
sterling,  payable  out  of  the  four  and  a  half  percent,  duties  5  whether 
he  has  any  addition  from  the  colonial  assembly  I  am  not  informed. 


126  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

be  fertile.  Several  of  the  mountains  contain  unex¬ 
tinguished  volcanoes,  which  frequently  discharge 
vast  quantities  of  burning  sulphur.  From  these 
mountains  also  issue  springs  of  hot  water,  some  of 
which  are  supposed  to  possess  great  virtue  in  the 
case  of  tropical  disorders.  In  some  places  the  wa¬ 
ter  is  said  to  be  hot  enough  to  coagulate  an  egg.* 

Dominica  is  well  watered,  there  being  up¬ 
wards  of  thirty  fine  rivers  in  the  island,  besides  a 
great  number  of  rivulets.  The  soil,  in  most  of 

O 

the  interior  country,  is  a  light,  brown  coloured 
mould,  and  appears  to  have  been  washed  from  the 
mountains.  Towards  the  sea-coast  and  in  many  of 
the  vallies,  it  is  a  deep,  black,  and  rich  native 
earth,  and  seems  well  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of 
all  the  articles  of  West  Indian  produce.  The  under 
stratum  is  in  some  parts  a  yellow  or  brick  clay,  in 
others  a  stiff  terrace,  but  the  land  is  in  most  places 
very  stony. 

I  am  afraid,  however,  that  the  quantity  of  fer¬ 
tile  soil  bears  but  a  very  small  proportion  to  the 
whole;  there  not  being  more  than  fifty  sugar  plan¬ 
tations  at  present  in  cultivation,  and  it  is  computed, 

#  In  the  woods  of  Dominica  are  innumerable  swarms  of  bees,  which 
lodge  in  the  trees,  and  produce  great  quantities  of  wax  and  ho¬ 
ney,  both  of  which  are  equal  in  goodness  to  any  in  Europe.  It  is 
precisely  the  same  species  of  bee  as  in  Europe,  and  must  have  been 
transported  thither  :  the  native  bee  of  the  West  Indies  being  a  small¬ 
er  species,  unprovided  with  stings,  and  very  different  in  its  manners 
from  the  European. 


127 


©map.  hi.]  WEST  INDIES. 

that  on  an  average  one  year  with  another,  those 
fifty  plantations  do  not  produce  annually  more  than 
three  thousand  hogsheads  of  sugar.  This  is  cer¬ 
tainly  a  very  small  quantity  of  that  article  for  such 
an  extensive  island,  or  even  for  the  number  of  su¬ 
gar  plantations  at  present  under  cultivation,  allow¬ 
ing  only  one  hundred  acres  of  canes  to  each. 

Coffee  seems  to  answer  better  than  sugar,  there 
being  somewhat  more  than  two  hundred  coffee 
plantations  in  Dominica,  which  in  favourable  years 
have  produced  three  millions  of  pounds  weight. 

A  small  part  of  the  lands  are  also  applied  to  the 
cultivation  of  cacao,  indigo,  and  ginger;  but  I  be¬ 
lieve  that  most  of  these  articles,  as  well  as  of  the 
cotton,  which  are  comprehended  in  the  exports, 
have  hitherto  been  obtained  from  the  dominions  of 
foreign  states  in  South  America,  and  imported  in¬ 
to  this  island  under  the  free-port  law. 

The  number  of  white  inhabitants,  of  all  descrip¬ 
tions  and  ages,  appears,  by  the  last  returns  to  go¬ 
vernment,  in  1788,  to  be  1,236;  of  free  negroes, 
&c.  445;  and  of  slaves  14,967.  There  are  also, 
from  twenty  to  thirty  families  of  the  ancient  na¬ 
tives,  or  Charaibes,  properly  so  called.  They  are 
a  very  quiet  inoffensive  people,  speak  a  language 
of  their  own,  and  a  little  French,  but  none  of  them 
understand  English.* 


*  A  late  writer  gives  the  following  account  of  these  people;  u  They 
are  of  a  clear  copper  colour,  have  long,  sleek  black  hair:  their  per- 


1 28  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

Such  is  the  information  which  I  have  collected 
concerning  the  civil  history  and  present  state  of 
Dominica,  for  great  part  of  which  lam  indebted 
to  a  late  publication  by  Mr.  Atwood.*  Nothing 
now  remains  but  to  set  forth  the  particulars  and  va¬ 
lue  of  its  productions,  which  I  shall  adopt,  as  in 
other  cases,  from  the  return  of  the  inspector-gene¬ 
ral  for  the  year  1787. 

sons  are  short,  stout,  and  well  made,  but  they  disfigure  their  faces  by 
flattening  their  foreheads  in  infancy.  They  live  chiefly  by  fishing  in 
the  rivers  and  the  sea,  or  by  fowling  in  the  woods,  in  both  which  pur¬ 
suits  they  use  their  bows  and  arrows  with  wonderful  dexterity.  It  is 
said  they  will  kill  the  smallest  bird  with  an  arrow  at  a  great  distance, 
or  transfix  a  fish  at  a  considerable  depth  in  the  sea.  They  display  al¬ 
so  very  great  ingenuity  in  making  curious  wrought  panniers,  or  bas¬ 
kets  of  silk  grass,  or  the  leaves  and  bark  of  trees.” 

*  See  the  History  of  the  Island  of  Dominica,  by  Mr.  Thomas  At¬ 
wood,  1791.  Treating  of  the  natural  productions  of  this  island,  Mr. 
Atwood  gives  the  following  account  of  an  insect,  which  he  calls  the 
vegetable  fly.  “It  is  of  the  appearance  and  size  of  a  small  cockcha¬ 
fer,  and  buries  itself  in  the  ground,  where  it  dies  ;  and  from  its  body 
springs  up  a  small  plant,  which  resembles  a  young  coffee  tree,  only 
that  its  leaves  are  smaller.  The  plant  is  often  overlooked,  from  the 
supposition  people  have  of  its  being  no  other  than  a  coffee  plant;  but 
on  examining  it  properly,  the  difference  is  easily  distinguished ;  the 
head,  body,  and  feet  of  the  insect  appearing  at  the  foot,  as  perfect  as 
when  alive.”  This  account  is  extraordinary,  but  not  more  surprising 
than  the  Rev.  Nicholas  Collins’s  description,  in  the  American  Philo¬ 
sophical  Transactions,  (Introduction  to  vol.  iii.  p.  33),  of  a  certain  zoo - 
phyton  in  the  Ohio  country,  which,  (he  declares),  is  alternately  vege¬ 
table  and  animal ;  for  having  crawled  about  the  woods  in  its  animal 
state  until  it  grows  weary  of  that  mode  of  existence,  it  fixes  itself 
in  the  ground,  and  becomes  a  stately  plant,  <with  a  stem  issuing  from 
its  mouth."  I  give  these  accounts  as  I  find  them,  without  vouching 
for  the  veracity  of  either. 
CHAPTER  IV. 


Leeward  Charaibean  Island  Government,  comprehending 
St.  Christopher's,  Nevis,  Antigua,  Montserrat,  and  the 
Virgin  Islands. — Civil  History  and  Geographical  De¬ 
scription  of  each. — Table  of  Exports  from  each  island 
for  1787;  and  an  account  of  the, '  money  arising  from 
the  duty  of  four  and  a  half  per  cent. — Observations 
concerning  their  decline ;  and  a  short  account  of  the 
islands  of  Bermudas  and  the  Bahamas. 

HE  British  Leeward  Islands,  since  the  year 


JL  1672,  have  constituted  one  distinct  govern¬ 
ment;  the  governor  being  stiled  Captain  General 
of  the  leeward  Charaibean  islands.  He  visits  each 
occasionally,  but  his  chief  seat  of  residence  is  An¬ 
tigua  3  the  government  of  each  in  the  absence  of 
the  governor-general,  being  usually  administered  by 
a  lieutenant-governor,  whose  authority  is  limited  to 
that  particular  island,  and  where  no  lieutenant-go¬ 
vernor  is  appointed,  the  president  of  the  council 
takes  the  command.  I  shall  treat  of  them  separate¬ 
ly,  and  afterwards  combine,  in  a  concise  summa- 


Vol  II. 


i38  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  hi. 

ry,  those  circumstances  which  are  common  to 
them  all. 

Their  civil  history  will  be  short ;  for  in  this  part 
of  my  subject  I  have  but  little  to  add  to  the  recital 
of  Oldmixon,  and  other  writers  who  have  prece¬ 
ded  me;  and  where  novelty  is  wanting,  brevity  is 
indispensably  requisite. 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 


SECTION  I. 

ST.  CHRISTOPHER'S. 

THE  island  of  St.  Christopher  was  called  by  its 
ancient  possessors,  the  Charaibes  Liamuiga,  or  the 
Fertile  island.  It  was  discovered  in  November 
1493,  by  Columbus  himself,  who  was  so  pleased 
with  its  appearance,  that  he  honoured  it  with  his 
own  Christian  name.  But  it  was  neither  planted 
nor  possessed  by  the  Spaniards.  It  was,  however, 
.{notwithstanding  that  the  general  opinion  ascribes 
the  honour  of  seniority  to  Barbadoes),  the  eldest  of 
all  the  British  territories  in  the  West  Indies,  and 
in  truth,  the  common  mother  both  of  the  English 
.and  French  settlements  in  the  Charaibean  islands. 
The  fact,  as  related  by  an  historian,*  to  whose  in¬ 
dustry  and  knowledge  I  have  been  so  largely  in¬ 
debted  in  my  account  of  St.  Vincent,  was  this,  “In 
the  number  of  those  gentlemen  who  accompanied 
captain  Roger  North,  in  a  voyage  to  Surinam,  was 
Mr.  Thomas  Warner,  who  making  an  acquaintance 
there  with  captain  Thomas  Painton,  a  very  experi¬ 
enced  seaman,  the  latter  suggested,  how  much  ea¬ 
sier  it  would  be  to  fix,  and  preserve  in  good  order,  a 


*  J)r.  John  Campbell , 


140 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 


colony  in  one  of  the  small  islands,  despised  and 
deserted  by  the  Spaniards,  than  on  that  vast  coun¬ 
try,  the  continent,  where,  for  want  of  sufficient 
authority,  all  things  were  fallen  into  confusion  ;  and 
he  particularly  pointed  out  for  that  purpose  the 
island  of  St.  Christopher.  This  gentleman  dying, 
Mr.  Warner  returned  to  England  in  1620,  resolved 
to  put  his  friend’s  project  in  execution.  He  accord¬ 
ingly  associated  himself  with  fourteen  other  per¬ 
sons,  and  with  them  took  his  passage  on  board  a 
ship  bound  to  Virginia.  From  thence  he  and  his 
companions  sailed  for  St,  Christopher’s,  where 
they  arrived  in  January  1623,  and  by  the  month 
of  September  following,  had  raised  a  good  crop  of 
tobacco,  which  they  proposed  to  make  their  staple 
commodity.”  It  has  been  shewn  in  a  former  chap¬ 
ter,  that  the  first  actual  establishment  in  Rarbadoes, 
took  place  the  latter  end  of  1624. 

By  the  generality  of  historians,  who  have  treated 
of  the  affairs  of  the  West  Indies,  it  is  asserted,  that 
a  party  of  the  French,  under  the  command  of  a 
person  of  the  name  of  D’Esnambuc,  took  posses¬ 
sion  of  one  part  of  this  island,  on  the  same  day  that 
Mr.  Warner  landed  on  the  other;  but  the  truth  is, 
that  the  first  landing  of  Warner  and  his  associates 
happened  two  years  before  the  arrival  of  D’Esnam¬ 
buc;  who,  it  is  admitted  by  Du  lertre,  did  not 
leave  France  until  1625.  Unfortunately,  the  Eng¬ 
lish  settlers,  in  the  latter  end  of  1623,  had  their 
plantations  demolished  by  a  dread!  ul  hurricane, 
which  put  a  sudden  stop  to  their  progress.  In 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  141 

consequence  of  this  calamity,  Mr.  Warner  return¬ 
ed  to  England  to  implore  succour ;  and  it  was  on 
that  occasion,  that  he  sought  and  obtained  the  pow¬ 
erful  patronage  and  support  of  James  Hay,  earl  of 
Carlisle.  This  nobleman  caused  a  ship  to  be  fitted 
out,  laden  with  all  kinds  of  necessaries.  It  was 
called  the  Hopewell,  and  arrived  at  St.  Christopher’s 
on  the  18th  of  May  1624;  and  thus  he  certainly 
preserved  a  settlement,  which  had  otherwise  died 
in  its  infancy.  W arner  himself  did  not  return  to 
St.  Christopher’s  until  the  year  following.  He  was 
then  accompanied  by  a  large  body  of  recruits,  and 
D’Esnambuc  arrived  about  the  same  time;  perhaps 
the  same  day.  This  latter  was  the  captain  of  a 
French  privateer;  and,  having  in  an  engagement 
with  a  Spanish  galleon  of  superior  strength,  been 
very  roughly  handled,  he  was  obliged,  after  losing 
several  of  his  men,  to  seek  refuge  in  these  islands. 
He  brought  with  him  to  St.  Christopher’s  about 
thirty  hardy  veterans,  and  they  were  cordially  re¬ 
ceived  by  the  English,  who  appear  at  this  time  to 
have  been  under  some  apprehensions  of  the  Cha- 
raibes.  Hitherto  Warner’s  first  colony  had  lived  on 
friendly  terms  with  these  poor  savages,  by  whom 
they  were  liberally  supplied  with  provisions;  but 
having  seized  on  their  lands,  the  consciousness  of 
deserving  retaliation  made  the  planters  apprehen¬ 
sive  of  an  attack,  when  probably  none  was  intend¬ 
ed.  Du  Tertre  relates,  that  the  French  and  Eng¬ 
lish  receiving  information  of  a  projected  revolt,  con¬ 
curred  in  a  scheme  for  seizing  the  conspirators  be¬ 
forehand.  Accordingly  they  fell  on  the  Charaibes 


142  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  ui. 

by  night,  and,  having  murdered  in  cold  blood  from 
one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  the 
stoutest,  drove  all  the  rest  from  the  island,  except 
such  of  the  women  as  were  young  and  handsome, 
of  whom,  says  the  reverend  historian,  they  made 
concubines  and  slaves.  Such  is  the  account  of  a 
contemporary  author,  Pere  Du  Tertre,  who  re¬ 
lates  these  transactions  with  perfect  composure,  as 
founded  on  common  usage,  and  not  unwarrantable 
in  their  nature.  He  adds,  that  such  of  the  Cha- 
raibes  as  escaped  the  massacre,  having  given  the 
alarm  to  their  countrymen  in  the  neighbouring 
islands,  a  large  body  of  them  returned  soon  after¬ 
wards,  breathing  revenge ;  and  now  the  conflict 
became  serious.  The  Europeans,  however,  more 
from  the  superiority  of  their  weapons,  than  of 
their  valour,  became  conquerors  in  the  end;  but 
their  triumph  was  dearly  purchased  5  one  hundred 
of  their  number  having  been  left  dead  on  the  field 
of  battle. 


After  this  exploit,  which  Du  Tertre  calls  a  glo¬ 
rious  victory,  the  Charaibes  appear  to  have  quitted, 
altogether,  this  and  some  of  the  small  islands  in 
the  neighbourhood,  and  to  have  retired  southwards. 
The  two  leaders,  Warner  and  D’Esnambuc,  about 
the  same  time,  found  it  necessary  to  return  to  Eu¬ 
rope,  for  the  purpose  of  soliciting  succour  from  their 
respective  nations;  and  bringing  with  them  the 
name  of  conquerors,  they  severally  met  with  all 
possible  encouragement.  Warner  was  knighted 
by  his  sovereign,  and  through  the  interest  of  his 


WEST  INDIES, 


1 43 


CHAP.  IV.] 

noble  patron  sent  back  as  governor  in  1626,  with 
four  hundred  new  recruits,  amply  supplied  with 
necessaries  of  all  kinds  3  while  D’Esnambuc,  under 
the  patronage  ofRichlieu,  (the  minister  of  France), 
projected  the  establishment  of  an  exclusive  com¬ 
pany  for  trading  to  this  and  some  of  the  other 
islands.  That  minister  concurred  with  D’Esnambuc 
in  opinion,  that  such  an  institution  was  best  adapt¬ 
ed  to  the  purposes  of  commerce  and  colonization ; — 1 
an  erroneous  conclusion,  which  D’Esnambuc  him¬ 
self  had  soon  abundant  occasion  to  lament  5  for  the 
French  in  general  either  misunderstood  or  disap¬ 
proved  the  project.  Subscriptions  came  in  reluct¬ 
antly,  and  the  ships  which  the  new  company  fitted 
out  on  this  occasion,  were  so  wretchedly  supplied 
with  provisions  and  necessaries,  that  of  five  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty-two  recruits,  who  sailed  from 
France  with  D’Esnambuc,  in  February  1627,  the 
greater  part  perished  miserably  at  sea  for  want  of 
food. 

The  English  received  the  survivors  with  com¬ 
passion  and  kindness ;  and  for  preventing  contests 
in  future  about  their  respective  limits,  the  com¬ 
manders  of  each  nation  agreed  to  divide  the  whole 
island  pretty  equally  between  their  followers.  A 
treaty  of  partition  for  this  purpose  was  reduced  to 
writing,  and  signed,  with  many  formalities,  on 
the  third  of  May  1 627  :  it  comprehended  also  a 
league  defensive  and  offensive ;  but  this  alliance 
proved  of  little  avail  against  the  Spanish  invasion  iu 
1629,  the  circumstances  whereof  I  have  elsewhere 


144 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

related.*  Yet  surely,  unjustifiable  as  that  attack 
may  be  deemed,  if  the  conduct  of  the  new  settlers 
towards  the  Charaibes  was  such  as  Du  Tertre  re¬ 
lates,  we  have  but  little  cause  to  lament  over  the 
miseries  which  befel  them.  The  mind  exults  in 
the  chastisement  of  cruelty,  even  when  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  vengeance  are  as  criminal  as  the  objects 
of  punishment. 

It  may  now  be  thought,  that  those  of  the  two 
nations  who  survived  so  destructive  a  storm,  had 
learnt  moderation  and  forbearance  in  the  school  of 
adversity;  and  indeed,  for  some  years  they  appear 
to  have  lived  on  terms  of  good  neighbourhood  with 
each  other;  but  at  length  national  rivalry,  and  here¬ 
ditary  animosity  were  allowed  their  full  influence, 
insomuch  that,  for  half  a  century  afterwards,  this 
little  island  exhibited  a  disgusting  scene  of  internal 
contention,  violence,  and  bloodshed.  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  at  this  time  to  pronounce  with  certainty,  whe¬ 
ther  the  French  or  the  English  were  the  first  ag¬ 
gressors.  It  is  probable  that  each  nation  would  lay 
the  blame  on  the  other.  We  are  told  that  in  the  first 
Dutch  war,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  the  French 
king  declaring  for  the  United  States,  his  subjects  in 
St.  Christopher’s,  disdaining  an  inglorious  neutrali¬ 
ty,  attacked  the  English  planters,  and  drove  them 
out  of  their  possessions;  which  were  afterwards, 
by  the  treaty  of  Breda,  restored  to  them.  In  1689, 
in  consequence  of  the  revolution  which  had  taken 


*  Book  ii.  chap.  H, 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  145 

place  in  England  the  preceding  year,  the  French 
planters  in  this  island,  declaring  themselves  in  the 
interests  of  the  abdicated  monarch,  attacked,  and 
expelled  their  English  neighbours  a  second  time, 
laying  waste  their  plantations,  and  committing  such 
outrages  as  are  unjustifiable  among  civilized  nations, 
even  in  a  time  of  open  and  avowed  hostility.  Their 
conduct  on  this  occasion  was  deemed  so  cruel  and 
treacherous,  that  it  was  assigned  by  king  William 
and  queen  Mary  among  the  causes  which  induced 
them  to  declare  war  against  the  French  nation. 
Even  fortune  herself,  inclining  at  length  to  the  side 
of  justice,  from  henceforward  deserted  them;  for, 
after  they  had  continued  about  eight  months  sole 
masters  of  the  island,  the  English  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  General  Codrington,  returning  in  great 
force,  not  only  compelled  the  French  inhabitants 
to  surrender,  but  actually  transported  eighteen  hun¬ 
dred  of  them  to  Martinico  and  Hispaniola.  It  is 
true  that  reparation  was  stipulated  to  be  made  them 
by  the  treaty  of  Rvswick  in  1767;  but  war  again 
breaking  out  between  the  two  nations  in  1702,  the 
French  planters  derived  but  little  advantage  from 
that  clause  in  their  favour.  They  had  however,  in 
1705,  the  gloomy  satisfaction  to  behold  many  of  the 
English  possessions  again  laid  waste  by  a  French  ar¬ 
mament,  which  committed  such  ravages,  that  the 
British  parliament  found  it  necessary  to  distribute 
the  sum  of  103,000  among  the  sufferers,  to  ena¬ 
ble  them  to  re-settle  their  plantations.  Happily, 
this  was  the  last  exertion  of  national  enmity  and 
civil  discord  within  this  little  community;  for,  at 
Vol.  II.  T 


!46  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  hi. 

the  peace  of  Utrecht,  the  island  was  ceded  wholly 
to  the  English,  and  the  French  possessions  publicly 
sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  English  government.  In 
1733,  £. 80,000  of  the  money  was  appropriated  as 
a  marriage  portion  with  the  princess  Anne,  who 
was  betrothed  to  the  prince  of  Orange.  Some  few 
of  the  French  planters,  indeed,  who  consented  to 
take  the  oaths,  were  naturalized  and  permitted  to 
retain  their  estates. 

Such  wrere  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  British 
establishment  in  the  island  of  St.  Christopher.  The 
circumstances  which  attended  the  French  invasion 
in  the  beginning  of  1782,  when  a  garrison  of  less 
than  one  thousand  effective  men  (including  the  mi¬ 
litia)  was  attacked  by  eight  thousand  of  the  best 
disciplined  troops  of  France,  supported  by  a  fleet 
of  thirty-two  ships  of  war;  the  consequent  surren¬ 
der  of  the  island,  after  a  most  vigorous  and  noble 
defence;  and  its  restoration  to  Great  Britain  by  the 
general  peace  of  1783,  being  within  every  person’s 
recollection,  need  not  be  related  at  large  in  this 
work.  I  shall  therefore  conclude  with  the  follow¬ 
ing  particulars,  which  I  presume  are  somewhat  less 
familiar  to  the  general  reader,  and  their  accuracy 
may  be  depended  on. 

St.  Christopher  lies  in  17  degrees  15  minutes 
north  latitude,  and  63  degrees  17  minutes  west 
longitude;  it  is  about  fourteen  leagues  in  circuit, 
and  contains  43,726  acres  of  land,  of  which  about 
17,000  acres  are  appropriated  to  the  growth  of  su- 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  147 

<■ 

gar,  and  4,000  to  pasturage.  As  sugar  is  the  only 
commodity  of  any  account  that  is  raised,  except 
provisions  and  a  little  cotton,  it  is  probable,  that 
nearly  one  half  the  whole  island  is  unfit  for  cultiva¬ 
tion.  The  interior  part  of  the  country  consists,  in¬ 
deed,  of  many  rugged  precipices,  and  barren  moun¬ 
tains.  Of  these,  the  loftiest  is  Mount  Misery, 
(evidently  a  decayed  volcano),  which  rises  3,711 
feet  in  perpendicular  height  from  the  sea.*  Na¬ 
ture,  however,  has  made  abundant  amends  for  the 
sterility  of  the  mountains  by  the  fertility  she  has  be¬ 
stowed  upon  the  plains.  No  part  of  the  West  In¬ 
dies  that  I  have  seen,  possesses  even  the  same  spe¬ 
cies  of  soil  that  is  found  in  St  Christopher’s.  It  is 
in  general  a  dark  grey  loam,  so  light  and  porous,  as 
to  be  penetrable  by  the  slightest  application  of  the 
hoe ;  and  I  conceive  it  to  be  the  production  of  sub¬ 
terraneous  fires,  the  black  ferruginous  pumice  of 
naturalists,  finely  incorporated  with  a  pure  loam, 
or  virgin  mould.  The  under  stratum  is  gravel, 
from  eight  to  twelve  inches  deep.  Clay  is  no 
where  found,  except  at  a  considerable  height  in  the 
mountains. 

By  what  process  of  nature  the  soil  which  I  have 
mentioned  becomes  more  especially  suited  to  the 

*  There  is  an  immense  crater  on  the  top  of  this  mountain,  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  which  is  nearly  level,  and  supposed  to  contain  50  acres,  of 
which  seven  are  covered  with  water ;  the  rest  are  clothed  with  high 
grass  and  trees,  among  which  the  mountain  cabbage  is  very  conspicu¬ 
ous.  From  the  crannies  or  fissures  of  this  crater  still  flow  streams  of 
hot  water,  which  are  strongly  impregnated  with  sulphur,  alum,  and 
vitriolic  acid. 


143 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

• 

production  of  sugar  than  any  other  in  the  West  In¬ 
dies,  it  is  neither  within  my  province  nor  ability  to 
explain.  The  circumstance,  however,  is  unques¬ 
tionable.  Canes,  planted  in  particular  spots,  have 
been  known  to  yield  8,000  lbs.  of  Muscovado  su¬ 
gar  from  a  single  acre.  One  gentleman,  in  a  fa¬ 
vourable  season,  made  6,400  lbs.  or  four  hogsheads 
of  sixteen  cwt.  each  per  acre,  on  an  average  return 
of  his  whole  crop.  It  is  not  however  pretended, 
that  the  greatest  part,  or  even  a  very  large  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  cane  land,  throughout  the  island,  is 
equally  productive.  The  general  average  produce 
for  a  series  of  years  is  .1 6,000  hogsheads  of  sixteen 
cwt.  which,  as  one  half  only  of  the  whole  cane 
land,  or  8,500  acres,  is  annually  cut,  (the  remainder 
being  in  young  canes),  gives  nearly  two  hogsheads 
of  sixteen  cwt.  per  acre  for  the  whole  of  the  land 
in  ripe  canes;  but  even  this  is  a  prodigious  return, 
not  equalled,  I  imagine,  by  any  other  sugar  country 
in  any  part  of  the  globe.  In  Jamaica,  though  some 
of  the  choicest  lands  may  yield,  in  favourable  years, 
two  hogsheads  of  sixteen  cwt.  per  acre;  the  cane- 
land  which  is  cut  annually,  taken  altogether,  does 
not  yield  above  a  fourth  part  as  much. 

I  am  informed,  however,  that  the  planters  of  St. 
Christopher’s  are  at  a  great  expense  for  manure; 
that  they  never  cut  ratoon  canes;*  and  although 
there  is  no  want  in  the  country  of  springs  and  rivu- 


*  Ratoon  canes  are  shoots  from  old  roots,  as  will  be  fully  explained 
hereafter. 


149 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 

lets  for  the  support  of  the  inhabitants,  their  planta¬ 
tions  suffer  much  in  dry  weather,  as  the  substratum 
does  not  long  retain  moisture.* 

This  island  is  divided  into  nine  parishes,  and  con¬ 
tains  four  towns  and  hamlets,  viz.  Basseterre  (the 
present  capital,  as  it  was  formerly  that  of  the 
French,  containing  about  800  houses),  Sandy  Point, 
Old  Road,  and  Deep  Bay.  Of  these,  the  two  first 
are  ports  of  entry,  established  by  law.  The  fortifi¬ 
cations  consist  of  Charles  Fort  and  Brimstone  Hill, 
both  near  Sandy  Point;  three  batteries  at  Basse¬ 
terre,  one  at  Fig-tree  Bay,  another  at  Palmeto 
Point,  and  some  smaller  ones  of  no  great  import¬ 
ance. 

The  proportion  which  St.  Christopher’s  contri¬ 
butes,  with  the  other  islands,  towards  an  honoura¬ 
ble  provision  for  the  governor  general,  is  «£*.  1,000 
currency  per  annum;  which  is  settled  on  him  by 
the  assembly  immediately  on  his  arrival.  He  has 
besides  some  perquisites ;  and  in  time  of  war  they 
are  considerable. 

Each  island  within  this  government  has  a  sepa¬ 
rate  council,  and  each  of  them  an  assembly,  or 
house  of  representatives.  In  St.  Christopher’s,  the 
council  should  consist  of  ten  members,  but  it  is 


*  The  woods  on  the  mountainous  part  of  this  island  harbour  abun¬ 
dance  of  a  small  species  of  monkey,  troops  of  which  frequently  come 
down  to  devour  the  canes,  and  do  inconceivable  mischief. 


1 5o  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

seldom  that  more  than  seven  are  present.  The 
house  of  assembly  is  composed  of  twenty-four  re¬ 
presentatives,  of  whom  fifteen  make  a  quorum. 
The  requisite  qualification  is  a  freehold  of  forty 
acres  of  land,  or  a  house  worth  forty  pounds  a 
year.  Of  the  electors,  the  qualification  is  a  freehold 
of  ten  pounds  per  annum. 

The  governor  of  this,  and  the  other  islands  in  the 
same  government,  is  chancellor  by  his  office,  and 
in  St.  Christopher’s  sits  alone.  Attempts  have 
been  made  to  join  some  of  the  council  with  him, 
as  in  Barbadoes;  but  hitherto  without  success,  the 
inhabitants  choosing  rather  to  submit  to  the  ex¬ 
pense  and  delay  of  following  the  chancellor  to  An¬ 
tigua,  than  suffer  the  inconveniency  of  having  on 
the  chancery  bench  judges,  some  of  whom  it  is 
probable,  from  their  situation  and  connexions,  may 
be  interested  in  the  event  of  every  suit  that  may 
come  before  them. 

v  - 

In  this  island,  as  in  Jamaica,  the  jurisdiction  of 
both  the  King’s  Bench  and  Common  Pleas,  cen¬ 
ters  in  one  superior  court,  wherein  justice  is  ad¬ 
ministered  by  a  chief  justice  and  four  puisne  judges. 
The  chief  is  appointed  by  the  crown,  the  others  by 
the  governor  in  the  king’s  name,  and  they  all  hold 
their  commissions  during  pleasure.  The  office  of 
chief  judge  is  worth  about  £.600  per  annum. 
The  emoluments  of  the  assistant  judges  are  tri¬ 
fling-. 


chap,  iv,]  WEST  INDIES.  151 

The  present  number  of  white  inhabitants  is  com¬ 
puted  at  4,000,  and  taxes  are  levied  on  26,000  ne¬ 
groes;  and  there  are  about  three  hundred  blacks 
and  mulattoes  of  free  condition. 

As  in  the  other  British  islands  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  all  the  white  men  from  the  age  of  sixteen  to 
sixty  are  obliged  to  enlist  in  the  militia,  and  in  this 
island  they  serve  without  pay.  They  form  two  re¬ 
giments  of  foot,  although  the  whole  number  of  ef¬ 
fective  men  in  each  regiment  seldom  exceeds  three 
hundred;  but  there  is  likewise  a  company  of  free 
blacks,  and  this,  before  the  late  war,  constituted 
the  whole  of  the  military  force  within  the  island; 
the  British  government  refusing  to  send  them  troops 
of  any  kind. 

Of  the  wisdom  of  such  conduct  in  Great  Britain, 
the  reader  will  be  able  properly  to  judge,  when  he 
is  told,  that  the  natural  strength  of  this  island,  from 
the  conformation  and  inequalities  of  its  surface,  is 
such,  that  a  garrison  of  two  thousand  effective 
troops,  properly  supplied  with  ammunition  and 
provisions,  would  in  all  human  probability  have 
rendered  it  impregnable  to  the  formidable  invasion 
of  1782. 

With  St.  Christopher’s  surrendered  also  the  island 
of  Nevis;  from  which  it  is  divided  only  by  a  small 
channel,  and  of  which  I  shall  now  give  some  ac¬ 
count. 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 


153 


Section  il 
NE  VIS . 

This  beautiful  little  spot  is  nothing  more  than  a 
single  mountain,  rising  like  a  cone  in  an  easy 
ascent  from  the  sea;  the  circumference  of  its  base 
not  exceeding  eight  English  leagues.  It  is  gene¬ 
rally  believed  that  Columbus  bestowed  on  it  the 
appellation  of  Nieves ,  or  The  Snows,  from  its  re¬ 
semblance  to  a  mountain  of  the  same  name  in 
Spain,  the  top  of  which  Is  covered  with  snow; 
but  it  is  not  an  improbable  conjecture,  that  in  those 
days,  a  white  smoke  was  seen  to  issue  from  the 
summit,  which  at  a  distance  had  a  snow-like 
appearance,  and  that  it  rather  derived  its  name 
from  thence.  That  the  island  was  produced  by 
some  volcanic  explosion,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  for 
there  is  a  hollow,  or  crater,  near  the  summit,  still 
visible,  which  contains  a  hot  spring,  strongly  im¬ 
pregnated  with  sulphur;  and  sulphur  is  frequently 
found  in  substance  in  the  neighbouring  gullies  and 
cavities  of  the  earth. 

The  country  is  well  watered,  and  the  land  in  ge¬ 
neral  fertile,  a  small  proportion  towards  the  sum¬ 
mit  of  the  island  excepted,  which  answers  howe¬ 
ver  for  the  growth  of  ground  provisions,  such  as 

Voh  II.  u 


154  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi, 

yams  and  other  esculent  vegetables.  The  soil  is 
stony;  the  best  is  a  loose  black  mould,  on  a  clay.. 
In  some  places,  the  upper  stratum  is  a  stiff  clay, 
which  requires  labour,  but  properly  divided  and 
pulverised,  repays  the  labour  bestowed  upon  it. 
The  general  produce  of  sugar  (its  only  staple  pro¬ 
duction)  is  one  hogshead  of  sixteen  cwt.  per  acre 
from  all  the  canes  that  are  annually  cut,  which  be^ 
ing  about  4,000  acres,  the  return  of  the  whole  is 
an  equal  number  of  hogsheads,  and  this  was  the 
average  fixed  on  by  the  French  government  in 
1782,  as  a  rule  for  regulating  the  taxes.  As  at  St. 
Christopher’s  the  planters  seldom  cut  ratoon  canes. 

This  island,  small  as  it  is,  is  divided  into  five  pa¬ 
rishes.  It  contains  a  town  called  Charles  Town, 
the  seat  of  government  and  a  port  of  entry,  and 
there  are  two  other  shipping  places,  called  Indian 
Castle,  and  New  Castle.  The  principal  fortification 
is  at  Charles  Town,  and  is  called  Charles  Fort* 
The  commandant  is  appointed  by  the  crowm,  but 
receives  a  salary  from  the  island. 

The  government,  in  the  absence  of  the  gover¬ 
nor-general,  is  administered  by  the  president  of  the 
council.  This  board  is  composed  of  the  president, 
and  six  other  members.  The  house  of  assembly 
consists  of  fifteen  representatives;  three  for  each 
parish. 

The  administration  of  common  law  is  under  the 
guidance  of  a  chief  justice,  and  two  assistant  judges, 
and  there  is  an  office  for  the  registry  of  deeds* 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  155 

The  present  number  of  white  inhabitants  is  sta¬ 
ted  to  me  not  to  exceed  six  hundred,  while  the  ne¬ 
groes  amount  to  about  ten  thousand;  a  dispropor¬ 
tion  which  necessarily  converts  all  such  white  men 
as  are  not  exempted  by  age  or  decrepitude,  into  a 
well  regulated  militia,  among  which  there  is  a 
troop  consisting  of  fifty  horse,  well  mounted  and 
accoutred.  English  forces,  on  the  British  establish¬ 
ment,  they  have  none. 

The  English  first  established  themselves  in  this 
island  in  the  year  1628,  under  the  protection  and 
encouragement  of  Sir  Thomas  Warner.  Among 
the  different  classes  of  men,  who  sought  to  improve 
their  fortunes  in  St.  Christopher’s  by  the  patronage 
of  that  enterprising  leader,  it  can  hardly  be  pre¬ 
sumed,  that  every  individual  experienced  the  full 
gratification  of  his  hopes  and  expectations.  In  all 
societies,  there  are  many  who  will  consider  them¬ 
selves  unjusty  overlooked  and  forgotten.  Of  the 
companions  of  Warner’s  earliest  voyages,  it  is  pro¬ 
bable  that  some  would  set  too  high  a  value  on  their 
services,  and  of  those  who  ventured  afterwards, 
many  would  complain,  on  their  arrival,  that  the 
best  lands  were  pre-occupied.  To  soften  and  tem¬ 
per  such  discordancy  and  disquiet,  by  giving  full 
employment  to  the  turbulent  and  seditious,  seems 
to  have  been  one  of  the  most  important  objects  of 
Warner’s  policy.  Motives  of  this  nature  induced 
him,  without  doubt,  to  plant  a  colony  in  Nevis  at 
so  early  a  period;  and  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of 
his  first  regulations  gave  strength  and  stability  to 
the  settlement, 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 


156 

What  Warner  began  wisely,  was  happily  com¬ 
pleted  by  his  immediate  successor  Mr.  Lake,  under 
whose  administration  Nevis  rose  to  opulence  and 
importance  “He  was  a  wise  man,”  says  DuTertre, 
“  and  feared  the  Lord.”  Making  this  island  the 
place  of  his  residence,  it  flourished  beyond  example. 
It  is  said  that  about  the  year  1640,  it  possessed 
four  thousand  whites ;  so  powerfully  are  mankind 
invited  by  the  advantages  of  a  mild  and  equitable 
system  of  government !  Will  the  reader  pardon  me, 
if  I  observe  at  the  same  time,  that  few  situations 
in  life  could  have  afforded  greater  felicity  than  that 
of  such  a  governor.  Living  amidst  the  beauties  of 
an  eternal  spring,  beneath  a  sky  serene  and  un¬ 
clouded,  and  in  a  spot  inexpressively  beautiful,  (for 
it  is  enlivened  by  a  variety  of  the  most  enchanting 
prospects  in  the  world,  in  the  numerous  islands 
which  surround  it),  but  above  all,  happy  in  the  re¬ 
flection  that  he  conciliated  the  differences,  adminis¬ 
tered  to  the  necessities,  and  augmented  the  com¬ 
forts  of  thousands  of  his  fellow-creatures,  all  of 
whom  looked  up  to  him  as  their  common  father 
and  protector.  If  there  be  pure  joy  on  earth,  it 
must  have  existed  in  the  bosom  of  such  a  man; 
while  he  beheld  the  tribute  of  love,  gratitude,  and 
approbation  towards  him  in  every  countenance,  and 
whose  heart  at  the  same  time  told  him  that  he  de¬ 
served  it. 

I  am  sorry  that  I  must  present  the  reader  with 
a  very  different  picture,  in  the  account  that  I  am 
now  to  give  of  Antigua. 


.chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 


157 


SECTION  III. 

ANTIGUA. 

Antigua  is  situated  about  twenty  leagues  to 
the  eastward  of  St.  Christopher’s,  and  was  disco¬ 
vered  at  the  same  time  with  that  island  by  Colum¬ 
bus  himself,  who  named  it  from  a  church  in  Se¬ 
ville,  Santa  Maria  de  la  Antigua.  We  are  inform¬ 
ed  by  Ferdinand  Columbus,  that  the  Indian  name 
was  Jamaica.  It  is  a  singular  circumstance,  that 
this  word,  which  in  the  language  of  the  larger 
islands  signified  a  country  abounding  in  springs , 
should,  in  the  dialect  of  the  Charaibes,  have  been 
applied  to  an  island  that  has  not  a  single  spring 
or  rivulet  of  fresh  water  in  it. 

This  inconvenience,  without  doubt,  as  it  render¬ 
ed  the  country  uninhabitable  to  the  Charaibes,  de¬ 
terred  for  some  time  the  European  adventurers  in 
the  neighbouring  islands  from  attempting  a  perma¬ 
nent  establishment  in  Antigua ;  but  nature  pre¬ 
sents  few  obstacles  which  the  avarice  or  industry  of 
civilized  man  will  not  endeavour  to  surmount.  The 
lands  were  found  to  be  fertile,  and  it  was  discovered 
that  cisterns  might  be  contrived  to  hold  rain-water  A 

*  The  water  thus  preserved  is  wonderfully  light,  pure,  and  whole¬ 
some. 


x 5 S  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  nr. 

So  early  as  1632,  a  few  English  families  took  up 
lands  there,  and  began  the  cultivation  of  tobacco. 
Among  these  was  a  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Warner, 
whose  descendants  still  possess  very  considerable 
property  in  the  island,  one  of  them  (Ashton  War¬ 
ner,  Esq.)  having  been,  in  1787,  president  of  the 
council,  and  commander  in  chief  in  the  absence  of 
the  governor. 

But  the  settlement  was  nearly  strangled  in  its  in- 
fency.  In  1666,  a  French  armament  from  Mar- 
tinico,  co-operating  with  a  body  of  Charaibes,  in¬ 
vaded  the  island  and  ravaged  the  country  with  fire 
and  sword.  All  the  negroes  that  could  be  found 
were  taken  away,  and  the  inhabitants,  after  behold¬ 
ing  their  houses  and  estates  in  flames,  were  plun¬ 
dered  even  to  the  clothes  on  their  backs,  and  the 
shoes  on  their  feet,  without  regard  to  sex  or  age. 

Its  recovery  from  this  calamity  was  owing  chiefly 
to  the  enterprising  spirit  and  extensive  views  of 
colonel  Codrington,  of  Barbadoes.  This  gentle¬ 
man  removing  to  Antigua  about  the  year  1674,  ap¬ 
plied  his  knowledge  in  sugar  planting  with  such 
good  effect  and  success,  that  others,  animated  by 
his  example,  and  assisted  by  his  advice  and  encou¬ 
ragement,  adventured  in  the  same  line  of  cultiva¬ 
tion.  Mr.  Codrington  was  some  years  afterwards 
nominated  captain-general  and  commander  in  chief 
of  all  the  Leeward  Charaibean  islands,  and,  deriving 
from  this  appointment  the  power  of  giving  greater 
energy  to  his  benevolent  purposes,  had  soon  the 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  159 

happiness  of  beholding  the  good  effects  of  his  hu¬ 
manity  and  wisdom,  in  the  flourishing  condition  of 
the  several  islands  under  his  government. 

The  prosperity  of  Antigua  was  manifested  in  its 
extensive  population;  for  when,  in  the  year  1690, 
general  Codrington  commanded  on  the  expedition 
against  the  French  inhabitants  of  St.  Christopher’s, 
as  hath  been  related  in  the  history  of  that  island, 
Antigua  furnished  towards  it  no  less  than  eight 
hundred  effective  men:  a  quota  which  gives  room 
to  estimate  the  whole  number  of  its  white  inhabi¬ 
tants  at  that  time,  at  upwards  of  five  thousand. 

Mr.  Codrington  dying  in  1698,  was  succeeded  in 
his  government  by  his  son  Christopher ;  a  gentleman 
eminently  distinguished  for  his  attainments  in  polite 
literature  3  and  who,  treading  in  the  same  paths 
as  his  illustrious  father,  gave  the  people  under  his 
government  the  promise  of  a  long  continuance  of 
felicity.*  His  administration,  however,  terminated 
at  the  end  of  six  years;  for  in  1704  he  was  supers 
seded  (I  know  not  on  what  account)  by  Sir  William 
Mathews;  who  dying  soon  after  his  arrival,  the 
queen  was  pleased  to  appoint  to  the  government 
of  this,  and  the  neighbouring  islands,  Daniel  Park, 

*  He  was  the  author,  if  I  mistake  not,  of  a  copy  of  verses  prefixed 
to  Garth’s  Dispensary,  and  in  which  is  this  beautiful  triplet: 

I  read  thee  over  with  a  lover’s  eye  : 

Thou  hast  no  faults,  or  I  no  faults  can  spy  : 

Thou  art  all  beauty ; — or  all  blindness  I. 


*6o  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii. 

Esq.  a  man,  whose  tragical  end  having  excited  the 
attention  of  Europe,  and  furnished  a  lesson  for  his¬ 
tory  to  perpetuate,  I  shall  be  excused  for  entering 
somewhat  at  large  into  his  conduct  and  fortune. 

Mr.  Park  was  a  native  of  Virginia*  and  was  dis¬ 
tinguished  for  his  successes  at  a  very  early  time  of 
life.  Having  married  a  lady  of  fortune  in  America, 
his  first  exploit  was  to  rob  his  wife  of  her  money, 
and  then  desert  her.  With  this  money  he  came  to 
England,  and  obtained  a  return  to  parliament 5  but 
gross  bribery  being  proved  against  him,  he  was  ex¬ 
pelled  the  house.  His  next  adventure  was  to  cle- 
bauch  the  wife  of  a  friend,  for  which  being  prose¬ 
cuted,  he  quitted  England,  and  made  a  campaign 
with  the  army  in  Flanders,  where  he  had  the  for¬ 
tune  to  attract  the  notice,  and  acquire  the  patro¬ 
nage,  of  the  duke  of  Marlborough. — In  1704,  he 
attended  the  duke  as  one  of  his  aides-de-camp,  and 
as  such,  on  the  event  of  the  battle  of  Hochstet, 
having  been  sent  by  his  grace  to  England,  with  in¬ 
telligence  of  that  important  victory,  he  was  re¬ 
warded  by  the  Queen  with  a  purse  of  a  thousand 
guineas,  and  her  picture  richly  set  with  diamonds. 
The  year  following,  the  government  of  the  Lee¬ 
ward  Islands  becoming  vacant,  Mr.  Park,  through 
the  interest  of  his  noble  patron,  was  appointed  to 
succeed  Sir  William  Mathews  therein,  and  he  ar¬ 
rived  at  Antigua  in  July  1700. 

As  he  was  a  native  of  America,  and  his  inte¬ 
rest  with  the  British  administration  was  believed  to 


chap.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  i€i 

be  considerable,  the  inhabitants  of  the  Leeward 
Islands,  who  were  probably  unacquainted  with  his 
private  character,  received  him  with  singular  re¬ 
spect,  and  the  assembly  of  Antigua,,  even  con¬ 
trary  to  a  royal  instruction,  added  a  thousand 
pounds  to  his  yearly  income,  in  order,  as  it  was 
expressed  in  the  vote,  to  relieve  him  from  the 
expense  of  a  house-rent ;  a  provision  which,  I 
believe,  has  been  continued  ever  since  to  his  suc¬ 
cessors  in  the  government, 

The  return  which  Mr.  Park  thought  proper  to 
make  for  this  mark  of  their  kindness,  was  an 
avowed  and  unrestrained  violation  of  all  decency 
and  principle.  He  feared  neither  God  nor  man ; 
and  it  was  soon  observed  of  him*  as  it  had  former¬ 
ly  been  of  another  detestable  tyrant,  that  he  spared 
no  man  in  his  anger ,  nor  woman  in  his  lust.  One 
of  his  first  enormities  was  to  debauch  the  wife  of 
a  Mr.  Chester,  who  was  factor  to  the  royal  African 
company,  and  the  most  considerable  merchant  in 
the  island.  Apprehending  that  the  injured  hus¬ 
band  might  meditate  revenge,  the  worthy  governor 
endeavoured  to  be  beforehand  with  him,  by  adding 
the  crime  of  murder  to  that  of  adultery,  for  Chester 
having  about  this  time  had  the  misfortune  to  kill  a 
person  by  accident,  his  excellency,  who  had  raised 
a  common  soldier  to  the  office  of  provost-marshal, 
brought  him  to  a  trial  for  his  life;  directing  his  in¬ 
strument  the  provost-marshal,  to  impanel  a  jury  of 
certain  persons,  from  whom  he  doubted  not  to  ob¬ 
tain  Chester’s  conviction;  and  the  execution  of  this 

Vol  II, 


x 


1 62  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  im 

Innocent  and  injured  man  would  undoubtedly  have 
followed,  if  the  evidence  in  his  favour  had  not  pro¬ 
ved  too  powerful  to  be  overborne;  so  that  the  jury 
were  compelled  to  pronounce  his  acquittal. 

Another  of  his  exploits,  was  an  attempt;  to  rob 
the  Codrihgton  family  of  the  island  of  Barbuda,  (of 
which  they  had  held  peaceable  possession  for  thirty 
years),  by  calling  on  them  to  prove  their  title  before 
himself  and  his  council;  a  measure  which  gave 
every  proprietor  reason  to  apprehend,  that  he  had 
no  security  for  his  possessions  but  the  governor’s 
forbearance,- 

He  declared,  that  he  would  suffer  no  provost- 
marshal  to  act,  who  should  not  at  all  times  summon 
such  juries  as  he  should  direct.  He  changed  the 
mode  of  electing  members  to  serve  in  the  assembly, 
in  order  to  exclude  persons  he  did  not  like ;  and 
not  being  able  by  this  measure  to  procure  an  assem¬ 
bly  to  his  wish,  he  refused  to  call  them  together 
even  when  the  French  threatened  an  invasion. 

He  entered  the  house  of  Mr.  Chester,  the  per¬ 
son  before  mentioned,  with  an  armed  force,  and 
seized  several  gentlemen  (some  of  them  the  princi¬ 
pal  men  of  the  island)  who  were  there  met  for  the 
purpose  of  good  fellowship,  on  suspicion  that  they 
were  concerting  measures  against  himself;  most  of 
whom  he  sent  by  his  own  authority  to  the  com¬ 
mon  jail,  and  kept  them  there  without  bail  or 
trial. 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  163 

By  these,  and  a  thousand  other  odious  and  in¬ 
temperate  proceedings,  the  whole  country  became 
a  party  against  him,  and  despatched  an  agent  to 
England,  to  lay  their  grievances  before  the  crown, 
adopting,  in  the  first  instance,  all  moderate  and 
legal  means  to  procure  his  removal ;  but  from  the 
•delays  incident  to  the  business,  the  people  lost  all 
temper,  and  began  to  consider  forbearance  as  no 
longer  a  virtue.  More  than  one  attempt  was  made 
on  the  governor’s  life,  in  the  last  of  which  he  was 
grieviously,  but  not  mortally,  wounded.  Unhap¬ 
pily,  the  furious  and  exasperated  state  of  men’s 
minds  admitted  of  no  compromise,  and  the  rash  im¬ 
petuous  governor  was  not  of  a  disposition  to  soften, 
•or  conciliate,  if  occasion  had  offered. 

At  length,  however,  instructions  came  from  the 
crown,  directing  Mr.  Park  to  resign  his  command 
to  the  lieutenant-governor,  and  return  to  England 
by  the  first  convenient  opportunity ;  at  the  same 
time  commissioners  were  appointed  to  take  exa¬ 
minations  on  the  spot,  concerning  the  complaints 
which  had  been  urged  against  his  conduct.  It 
would  have  been  happy  if  the  inhabitants  of  An¬ 
tigua  had  borne  their  success  with  moderation;  but 
;the  triumphant  joy  which  they  manifested,  on  re¬ 
ceipt  of  the  Queen’s  orders,  provoked  the  governor 
into  desperation.  He  declared,  that  he  would  con¬ 
tinue  in  the  government  in  spite  of  the  inhabitants, 
and  being  informed,  that  a  ship  was  about  to  sail 
for  Europe,  in  which  he  might  conveniently  have 
embarked,  he  refused  to  leave  the  country.  In  the 


164 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m, 

mean-while,  to  convince  the  people  that  his  firm¬ 
ness  was  unabated,  and  that  he  still  considered 
himself  in  the  rightful  exercise  of  his  authority, 
he  issued  a  proclamation  to  dissolve  the  assembly. 

Matters  were  now  coming  fast  to  an  issue.  The 
assembly  continued  sitting  notwithstanding  the  go¬ 
vernor’s  proclamation,  and  resolved,  that  having- 
been  recalled  by  his  sovereign,  his  continuance  in 
the  government  was  usurpation  and  tyranny,  and 
that  it  was  their  duty  to  take  charge  of  the  safety 
and  peace  of  the  island.  On  hearing  of  this  vote, 
the  governor  secretly  ordered  a  party  of  soldiers  to 
surround  them;  but  the  assembly  having  obtained 
information  of  his  intentions,  immediately  separa¬ 
ted  to  provide  for  their  personal  safety.  The  en¬ 
suing  night  and  the  whole  of  the  following  day, 
were  employed  in  summoning  the  inhabitants  from 
all  parts  of  the  island,  to  hasten  to  the  capital, 
properly  armed,  to  protect  their  representatives. 
It  was  given  out,  however,  that  the  governor’s  life 
was  not  aimed  at;  all  that  was  intended  was  to 
secure  his  person,  and  send  him  from  the  island. 

On  Thursday  the  7th  of  December  1710,  early 
in  the  morning,  about  five  hundred  men  appeared 
in  arms,  in  the  town  of  Saint  John’s,  where  colo¬ 
nel  Park  had  been  making  provision  for  resistance 
in  case  of  an  attack.  He  had  converted  the  govern¬ 
ment  house  into  a  garrison,  and  stationed  in  it  all 
jhe  regular  troops  that  were  in  the  island.  On  the 
approach  of  the  inhabitants,  however,  his  courage 


e#AP.  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  165 

deserted  him.  The  sight  of  an  injured  people 
coming  forward  as  one  man,  with  deliberate  va¬ 
lour  to  execute  on  his  person  that  punishment 
which  he  must  have  been  conscious  his  enormities 
well  merited,  over-whelmed  him  with  confusion 
and  terror.  Although  he  must  have  been  apprized, 
that  his  adversaries  had  proceeded  too  far  to  retreat, 
he  now,  for  the  first  time,  when  it  was  too  late, 
had  recourse  to  concession.  He  despatched  the 
provost-marshal  with  a  message,  signifying  his  rea¬ 
diness  to  meet  the  assembly  at  Parham,  and  to 
consent  to  whatever  laws  they  should  think  proper 
to  pass  for  the  good  of  the  country.  He  offered  at 
the  same  time  to  dismiss  his  soldiers,  provided,  six 
of  the  principal  inhabitants  would  remain  with  him 
as  hostages  for  the  safety  of  his  person.  The  speak¬ 
er  of  the  assembly,  and  one  of  the  members  of  the 
council,  unwilling  to  carry  matters  to  the  last  extre¬ 
mity,  seemed  inclined  to  a  compromise,  and  pro¬ 
posed  themselves  as  two  of  the  hostages  required 
by  the  governor ;  but  the  general  body  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  apprehensive  that  further  delay  might  be  fatal 
to  their  cause,  called  aloud  for  immediate  ven¬ 
geance  5  and  instantly  marched  forward  in  two  divi¬ 
sions.  One  of  these,  led  by  Mr.  Piggot,  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  assembly,  taking  possession  of  an  emi¬ 
nence  that  commanded  the  government  house,  at¬ 
tacked  it  with  great  fury.  The  fire  was  briskly  re¬ 
turned  for  a  considerable  time,  but  at  length  the 
assailants  broke  into  the  house.  The  governor  met 
them  with  firmness,  and  shot  Piggot  dead  wTith  his 
own  hand,  but  received  in  the  same  moment,  a 


i66 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m. 

wound  which  laid  him  prostrate.  His  attendants, 
seeing  him  fall,  threw  down  their  arms,  and  the  en¬ 
raged  populace,  seizing  the  person  of  the  wretch¬ 
ed  governor,  who  was  still  alive,  tore  him  into  a 
thousand  pieces,  and  scattered  his  reeking  limbs  in 
the  street.  Besides  the  governor,  an  ensign  and 
thirteen  private  soldiers  who  fought  in  his  cause, 
were  killed  outright,  and  a  lieutenant  and  twenty- 
four  privates  wounded.  Of  the  people,  thirty-two 
were  killed  and  wounded,  besides  Mr.  Piggot. 
The  governor’s  death  instantly  put  an  end  to  this 
’bloody  conflict. 

Thus  perished,  in  a  general  insurrection  of  an 
insulted  and  indignant  community,  a  brutal  and  li¬ 
centious  despot,  than  whom  no  state  criminal  was 
•ever  more  deservedly  punished.  Fie  was  a  mon¬ 
ster  in  wickedness,  and  being  placed  by  his  situa¬ 
tion  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  restraint,  it  wras 
as  lawful  to  cut  him  off  by  every  means  possible,  as 
It  would  have  been  to  shoot  a  wild  beast  that  had 
broke  its  limits,  and  was  gorging  itself  with  human 
blood.  “  The  people  of  England,”  says  an  eminent 
writer,*  £;C  heard  with  astonishment  of  Park’s  un¬ 
timely  fate ;  but  the  public  were  divided  in  their 
sentiments ;  some  looking  upon  his  death  as  an  act 
of  rebellion  against  the  crown,  and  others  consi¬ 
dering  it  as  a  sacrifice  to  liberty.  The  flagrancy  of 
the  perpetration,  and  compassion  for  the  man,  at 
last  got  the  better.”  In  the  latter  assertion  howe¬ 
ver,  the  writer  is  clearly  mistaken ;  for  the  English 


*  Universal  History,  vol.  xii. 


CHAP.  17.]  WEST  INDIES.  i6j 

government,  after  full  investigation,  was  so  tho¬ 
roughly  satisfied  of  Mr.  Park’s  misconduct,  as  to 
issue,  much  to  its  honour,  a  general  pardon  of  all 
persons  concerned  in  his  death,  and  two  of  the 
principal  actors  therein  were  even  promoted,  some 
time  afterwards,,  to  seats  in  the  council.. 

From  this  period  I  close  my  account  of  the  civil 
concerns  of  Antigua,  finding  no  occurrence  in  its 
subsequent  history  of  sufficient  importance  to  detain 
the  reader;  what  remains  therefore  is  chiefly  topo¬ 
graphical,  and  I  hope  will  be  found  correct. 

Antigua  is  upwards  of  fifty  miles  in  circumfer¬ 
ence,  and  contains  59,838  acres  of  land,  of  which 
about  34,000  are  appropriated  to  the  growth  of  su¬ 
gar,  and  pasturage  annexed:  its  other  principal 
staples  are  cotton  wool  and  tobacco ;  to  wffiat  ex¬ 
tent  of  cultivation  I  am  not  informed;  and  they 
raise  in  favourable  years  great  quantities  of  provi¬ 
sions. 

This  island  contains  two  different  kinds  of  soil ; 
the  one  a  black  mould  on  a  substratum  of  clay, 
which  is  naturally  rich,  and  when  not  checked  by 
excessive  droughts,  to  which  Antigua  is  particular¬ 
ly  subject,  very  productive.  The  other  is  a  stiff 
day  on  a  substratum  of  marl.  It  is  much  less  fer¬ 
tile  than  the  former,  and  abounds  with  an  inirradi- 
cable  kind  of  grass,  in  such  a  manner,  that  many 
estates  consisting  of  that  kind  of  soil,  which  'were 
once  very  profitable,  are  now  so  impoverished  and 


1 68 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi, 

overgrown  with  this  sort  of  grass,  as  either  to  be 
converted  into  pasture  land,  or  to  become  entirely 
abandoned.  Exclusive  of  such  deserted  land,  and 
a  small  part  of  the  country  that  is  altogether  unim¬ 
provable,  every  part  of  the  island  may  be  said  to  be 
under  cultivation. 

From  the  circumstances  that  have  been  related, 
it  is  difficult  to  furnish  an  average  return  of  the 
crops,  which  vary  to  so  great  a  degree,  that  the 
quantity  of  sugar  exported  from  this  island  in  some 
years,  is  five  times  greater  than  in  others;  thus  in 
1779  were  shipped  3,382  hogsheads,  and  579 
tierces;  in  1782  the  crop  was  15,102  hogsheads, 
and  1,603  tierces;  and  in  the  years  1770,  1773, 
and  1778,  there  were  no  crops  of  any  kind;  all  the 
canes  being  destroyed  by  a  long  continuance  of  dry 
weather,  and  the  whole  body  of  the  negroes  must 
have  perished  for  want  of  food,  if  American  ves¬ 
sels  with  corn  and  flour  had  been  at  that  time,  as 
they  now  are,  denied  admittance.* 

It  seems  to  me  on  the  whole,  that  the  island  has 
progressively  decreased  both  in  produce  and  white 
population.  The  last  accurate  returns  to  govern¬ 
ment  were  in  1774.  In  that  year,  the  white  inha¬ 
bitants  of  all  ages  and  sexes  were  2,590,  and  the 
enslaved  negroes  37,808,  and  I  believe,  that  17,000 

*  In  the  year  1789  there  was  no  fall  of  rain  for  seven  months, 
whereby  there  was  not  only  no  crop  of  sugar,  but  5,000  head  of  horn¬ 
ed  cattle  perished  for  want  of  water. 


CHAP.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  169 

hogsheads  of  sugar  of  sixteen  cwt.  are  reckoned  a 
good  saving  crop.  This*  as  one  half  the  canes  on¬ 
ly  are  cut  annually,  is  about  a  hogshead  of  sugar 
per  acre  for  each  acre  that  is  cut.  The  produce  of 
1787  will  be  given  hereafter;  and  I  believe  it  was 
a  year  more  favourable  to  Antigua,  in  proportion 
to  its  extent,  than  to  any  other  of  the  British 
islands  in  the  West  Indies. 

Antigua  is  divided  into  six  parishes  and  eleven 
districts,  and  contains  six  towns  and  villages.  St. 
John’s*  (the  capital)*  Parham,  Falmouth,  Willough¬ 
by  Bay,  Old  Road,  and  James  Fort:  of  which  the 
two  first  are  legal  ports  of  entry. — No  island,  in 
this  part  of  tire  West  Indies,  can  boast  of  so  many 
excellent  harbours.  Of  these,  the  principal  are 
English  harbour  and  Saint  John’s,  both  well  forti¬ 
fied,  and  at  the  former  the  British  government  has 
established  a  royal  navy  yard  and  arsenal,  and  con- 
veniencies  for  careening  ships  ot  war. 

The  military  establishment  generally  consists  of 
two  regiments  of  infantry,  and  two  of  foot  militia. 
There  are  likewise  a  squadron  of  dragoons,  and  a 
battalion  of  artillery,  both  raised  in  the  island,  and 
the  regulars  receive  additional  pay,  as  in  Jamaica. 

*  The  town  of  Saint  John  was  nearly  destroyed  by  fire  on  the  17th 
■of  August  1769;  upwards  oV  260  houses  being  consumed;  besides 
wharfs,  cranes,  & c.  & c. 


Vol.  IE 


Y 


270  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  hi. 

It  hath  been  already  observed,  that  the  governor 
or  captain  general  of  the  leeward  Charaibean  islands,, 
although  directed  by  his  instructions  to  visit  occasi- 
only  each  island  within  his  government,  is  gene¬ 
rally  stationary  at  Antigua 5  he  is  chancellor  of  each 
island  by  his  office,  but  commonly  holds  the  court 
in  Antigua,  and  in  hearing  and  determining  causes 
from  the  other  islands,  presides  alone.  In  causes 
arising  in  Antigua,  he  is  assisted  by  his  council, 
after  the  practice  of  Barbadoes;  and,  by  an  act  of 
the  assembly  of  this  island,  confirmed  by  the  crown, 
the  president  and  a  certain  number  of  the  council 
may  determine  chancery  causes  during  the  absence 
of  the  governor  general.  The  other  courts  of  this 
island  are  a  court  of  King’s  Bench,  a  court  of  Com¬ 
mon  Pleas,  and  a  court  of  Exchequer. 

The  legislature  of  Antigua  is  Composed  of  the 
commander  in  chief,  a  council  of  twelve  members, 
and  an  assembly  of  twenty-five ;  and  it  is  very 
much  to  its  honour,  that  it  presented  the  first  exam¬ 
ple  to  the  sister  islands  of  a  melioration  of  the  cri¬ 
minal  law  respecting  negro  slaves,  by  giving  the 
accused  party  the  benefit  of  a  trial  by  jury:  and  al¬ 
lowing  in  the  case  of  capital  convictions  four  days 
between  the  time  of  sentence  and  execution.  And 
it  is  still  more  to  the  honour  of  Antigua,  that  its 
inhabitants  have  encouraged  in  a  particular  manner, 
the  laudable  endeavours  of  certain  pious  men,  who 
have  undertaken,  from  the  purest  and  best  motives, 
to  enlighten  the  minds  of  the  negroes,  and  lead 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  171 

them  into  the  knowledge  of  religious  truth.  In 
the  report  of  the  lords  of  the  committee  of  coun¬ 
cil  on  the  slave  trade,  is  an  account  of  the  labours 
of  the  society  known  by  the  name  of  the  Unitas 
Fratrum  (commonly  called  Moravians)  in  this 
truly  glorious  pursuit;  from  which  it  appears,  that 
their  conduct  in  this  business  displays  such  sound 
judgment,  breathes  such  a  spirit  of  genuine  Chris¬ 
tianity,  and  has  been  attended  with  such  eminent 
success,  as  to  entitle  its  brethren  and  missionaries 
to  the  most  favourable  reception,  from  every  man 
whom  the  accidents  of  fortune  have  invested  with 
power  over  the  poor  Africans;  and  who  believes 
(as  I  hope  every  planter  believes)  that  they  are  his 
fellow  creatures,  and  of  equal  importance  with 
himself  in  the  eyes  of  an  all-seeing  and  impartial 
Governor  of  the  Universe.  With  an  abridgment 
of  that  account,  I  shall  close  the  subject  of  my  pre¬ 
sent  discussion. 

The  church  of  the  United  Brethren  have,  ever 
since  the  year  1732,  been  active  in  preaching  the 
gospel  to  different  heathen  nations  in  many  parts  of 
the  world,  but  not  with  equal  success  in  all  places. 
The  method  here  described,  and  made  use  of  by  the 
missionaries  of  the  said  church,  in  leading  the  ne¬ 
gro  slavey  in  the  West  Indies  to  the  knowledge  and 
practice  of  Christianity,  is  followed,  in  all  points  that 
are  not  local,  in  all  the  missions  of  the  brethren. 

After  many  years  unsuccessful  labour,  experi¬ 
ence  has  taught  them,  that  the  plain  testimony 


172 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m, 

concerning  the  death  and  passion  of  Jesus  Christ 
the  Son  of  God,  together  with  its  cause  and  happy 
consequences,  delivered  by  a  missionary  touched 
with  an  experimental  sense  of  it,  is  the  surest  way 
of  enlightening  the  benighted  minds  of  the  ne¬ 
groes,  in  order  to  lead  them  afterwards  step  by 
step  into  all  truth :  they  therefore  make  it  a  rule, 
never  to  enter  into  an  extensive  discussion  of  the 
doctrines  of  God’s  being  an  infinite  spirit,  of  the 
Holy  Trinity,  & c.  nor  to  seek  to  open  their  under¬ 
standings  in  those  points,  until  they  believe  in  Je¬ 
sus,  and  that  the  word  of  the  Cross  has  proved  it¬ 
self  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  by  the  true 
conversion  of  their  hearts.  Both  in  the  beginning 
and  progress  of  their  instructions,  the  missionaries 
endeavour  to  deliver  themselves  as  plainly  and  in¬ 
telligibly  to  the  faculties  of  their  hearers  as  possi¬ 
ble;  and  the  Lord  has  given  his  blessing  even  to 
the  most  unlearned  that  went  forth  in  reliance  up¬ 
on  him,  to  learn  the  difficult  languages  of  the  ne¬ 
groes,  so  as  to  attain  to  great  fluency  in  them  :  one 
great  difficulty  arises,  indeed,  from  the  new  ideas 
and  words  necessary  to  express  the  divine  truths  to 
be  introduced  into  them;  but  even  this  has  been 
surmounted  through  God’s  grace. 

As  it  is  required  of  all  believers,  that  they  prove 
their  faith  by  their  works;  the  brethren  teach,  that 
no  habit  of  sin,  in  any  land  or  place,  nor  any  pre¬ 
vailing  custom  whatever,  can  be  admitted  as  a  plea 
for  a  behaviour  not  conformable  to  the  moral  law  of 


173 


chap.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES. 

God,  given  unto  all  mankind.  ETpon  the  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  this  the  missionaries  insist  every  where. 
Every  thing  that  is  accounted  decent  and  virtuous 
among  Christians,  is  inculcated  into  the  minds  of 
the  people.  Drunkenness,  adultery,  whoredom, 
sorcery,  theft,  anger,  and  revenge,  and  all  other 
works  of  the  flesh,  as  enumerated  by  our  Lord  and 
his  Apostles  as  proceeding  from  the  heart,  being 
plain  proofs  that  man  is  either  unconverted,  or 
again  fallen  into  heathenism  and  idolatry,  it  follows 
of  course,  that  any  one  guilty  of  these  things  is  put 
away  from  the  congregation,  and  not  re-admitted  be¬ 
fore  a  true  and  sincere  repentance  is  apparent,  and 
the  offence  done  away:  but  it  is  not  sufficient  that 
the  believers  abstain  from  open  scandal,  their  pri¬ 
vate  behaviour  in  their  families,  and  in  every  oc¬ 
currence  of  life,  must  evidence  a  thorough  change 
of  heart  and  principles :  indeed,  the  believing  ne¬ 
groes  in  Antigua,  and  in  other  places  where  the 
brethren  have  missions,  are  so  much  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  their  masters,  and  of  a  variety  of  circum¬ 
stances  that  attend  their  being  slaves,  that  it  may 
perhaps  seem  more  difficult  to  effect  a  change  of 
customs  and  practices,  and  to  enforce  a  steady 
Christian  conduct  in  all  cases  amongst  them,  than 
amongst  free  heathens;  and  yet  it  must  be  owned, 
to  the  praise  of  God,  that  this  is  visible  at  present 
in  many  thousand  converted  negroes. 

The  missionaries,  however,  have  frequent  oc¬ 
casion  to  see  with  sorrow,  how  deeply  rooted  the 


r 


174  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

habit  of  si  si,  and  the  tendency,  to  excuse  it,  is  in  the 
minds  of  the  negroes  ;  who  when  unconverted,  are 
particularly  given  to  an  unbounded  gratification  of 
every  sensual  Just;  but  on  this  very  account  it  be¬ 
comes  the  more  needful  to  watch,  and  not  to  suffer 
the  least  deviation  from  the  right  path,  to  remain 
unnoticed  in  the  believers.  It  has  been  before  ob¬ 
served,  that  baptism  is  administered  to  none,  but 
to  such  in  whom  a  thorough  conversion  of  heart  is 
already  perceivable.  As  soon  as  they  are  consider¬ 
ed  as  candidates  for  baptism,  they  are  subject  to  the 
discipline  of  the  church,  by  which,  if  they  offend, 
and  private  admonition  and  reproof  have  not  the  de¬ 
sired  effect,  they  are  excluded  from  the  fellowship 
of  the  rest,  though  they  may  attend  public  service, 
and  every  means  is  still  faithfully  applied  to  bring 
them  back.  Thus  a  communicant,  in  case  of  an  of¬ 
fence  given,  is  not  admitted  to  the  Lord’s  supper. 
This  discipline  has,  by  God’s  blessing,  had  so  good 
an  effect,  that  many  a  believing  negro  would  rather 
suffer  the  severest  bodily  punishment,  than  incur  it. 
If  they  confess  their  sins,  and  heartily  repent,  they 
are  willingly,  and,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  of¬ 
fence,  either  privately,  or  in  the  presence  of  a  part, 
or  the  whole  of  the  congregation,  re-admitted  to 
the  fellowship  of  the  church.  The  believing  ne¬ 
groes  are  not  suffered  to  attend  any  where,  where 
the  unconverted  meet  for  the  sake  of  feasting,  dan¬ 
cing,  gaming,  & c.  and  the  usual  plea  of  not  en¬ 
tering  into  the  sinful  part  of  these  diversions ,  is 
never  admitted,  inasmuch,  as  the  least  step  towards 


€HAP.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  175 

vice  and  immorality,  generally  plunges  them  by 
degrees  into  gross  sins.  The  hankering  after  the 
vain  traditions  of  their  forefathers,  is  considered  as 
a  falling  off  from  that  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
his  doctrines,  which  once  prompted  them  to  for¬ 
sake  all  ungodliness,  and  devote  themselves  unto 
God;  and  if  they  persist  in  evil  ways,  the  faithful¬ 
ness  due  to  the  rest  of  the  hock  on  the  part  of  the 
missionaries,  demands  their  separation,  lest  they 
seduce  others. 

The  polygamy  of  the  negroes  has  caused  no  small 
embarrassment  to  the  missionaries.  The  follow¬ 
ing  is  a  short  account  of  the  brethren’s  manner  of 
treating  them  in  this  particular  :  When  a  negro  man 
or  woman  applies  as  above  described,  to  be  baptized 
or  received  into  the  congregation,  strict  inquiry  is 
made  concerning  every  circumstance  attending  his 

or  her  situation  and  connections  in  life.  If  it  is 

% 

found  that  a  man  has  more  than  one  wife,  the 
question  arises,  how  the  brethren  have  to  advise 
him  in  this  particular :  St.  Paul  says,  “  if  any  bro¬ 
ther  hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not,  and  she  be 
pleased  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him  not  put  her 
away,”  1  Cor.  vii.  12:  But  again  he  says,  “  a  bi¬ 
shop  must  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one  wife,” 
2Tim.iii.  2.  We  read  of  no  further  precept  in 
the  holy  scriptures  concerning  this  subject ;  the 
brethren  therefore  were  of  opinion,  that  the  mis¬ 
sionaries  should  keep  strictly  to  the  following  re¬ 
solutions: 


1 76  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iiu 

1.  That  they  could  not  compel  a  man,  who  had, 
before  his  conversion,  taken  more  than  one  wife, 
to  put  away  one  or  "more  of  them,  without  her  or 
their  consent. 

2.  Rut  yet,  that  they  could  not  appoint  such  a 
man  to  be  a  helper  or  servant  in  the  church;  and, 

3.  That  a  man  who  believeth  in  Christ,  if  he 
marry,  should  take  only  one  wife  in  marriage,  and 
that  he  is  bound  to  keep  himself  only  to  that  wo¬ 
man,  till  death  parts  them. 

The  instances  that  a  man  has  three  wives  are 
few ;  all  mistresses  must  of  course  be  put  away 
without  exception ;  besides  this,  the  missionaries 
lose  no  opportunity  of  inculcating  into  the  minds  of 
the  married  people,  how  to  walK  in  this  state 
conformable  to  the  rules  laid  down  in  holy  writ, 
and  every' deviation  from  them  is  severely  censured. 
If  any  baptized  man  leaves  his  wile,  and  takes  ano¬ 
ther,  and  takes  one  or  more  wives  besides  the  first, 
or  in  case  he  has  had  two,  and  one  dies  and  he 
should  marry  another,  he  is  excluded  the  fellowship 
of  the  church.  Neither  can  the  brethren  admit  of 
the  heathenish  customs  in  courting  a  wife,  but  they 
expect,  that  in  case  a  believer  wish  to  marry,  he 
do  all  things  in  a  decent  and  Christian  manner :  it  is 
of  course  expected,  that  all  baptized  parents  edu¬ 
cate  their  children  in  the  tear  of  the  Lord,  shewing 
them  a  good  example.  If  bv  a  sale  of  negroes  by 


177 


-shap.  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 

.auction,  or  in  any  other  way,  wives  are  tom  from 
•their  husbands,  or  husbands  from  their  wives,  and 
carried  off  to  distant  islands,  though  the  brethren 
do  not  advise,  yet  they  cannot  hinder  a  regular 
marriage  with  another  person,  especially,  if  a  fa¬ 
mily  of  young  children,  or  other  circumstances, 
seem  to  render  an  helpmate  necessary;  and,  as  is 
mostly  the  case,  no  hopes  remain  of  the  former 
.ever  returning.  A  certificate  of  baptism  is  given 
to  every  baptized  negro.,  that  must  thus  leave  the 
congregation ;  and  there  have  been  instances,  that 
by  their  godly  walk  and  conversation  in  distant 
parts,  they  have  caused  others  to  hearken  to  their 
word,  and  believe. 

Though  all  the  above  injunctions  are  of  such  a 
nature,  that  they  not  only  war  against  their  hea¬ 
thenish  propensities,  but  even  against  what  some 
might  call  excusable  indulgences  ;  yet  it  is  a  fact, 
-that  at  this  present  time,  some  thousand  negroes 
in  Antigua,  and  other  islands,  submit  to  them  with 
willingness. 

The  number  of  converted  negro  slaves  undef 
the  care  of  the  brethren,  at  the  end  of  the  year 
1787,  was, — 


178  HISTORY  OF  THE 

[book  III. 

In  Antigua,  exactly  -  - 

- 

5,4  65 

In  St.  Kitt’s,  a  new  mission 

- 

80 

In  Rarbadoes  and  Jamaica,  about 

100 

In  St.  Thomas,  St.  Croix,  and] 
St.  Jan,  about  -  -  -  J 

I 

10,000 

In  Surinam,  about  -  -  -  - 

400 

Still  living  in  the  West  Indies  and] 

j-  16,045. 

Surinam  -------  j 

as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained  from  the  latest  ac¬ 
counts.” 


chap,  it.]  WEST  INDIES. 


*79 


SECTION  IV, 


MONTSERRAT \ 

Of  this  little  island,  neither  the  extent  nor  the 
importance  demands  a  very  copious  discussion.  It 
was  discovered  at  the  same  time  with  St.  Chris¬ 
topher’s,  and  derived  its  name  from  a  supposed  re¬ 
semblance  which  Columbus  perceived  in  the  face 
of  the  country  to  a  mountain  of  the  same  name 
near  Barcelona. 

The  name  was  all  that  was  bestowed  upon  it  by 
the  Spaniards.  Like  Nevis,  it  was  first  planted  by 
a  small  colony  from  St.  Christopher’s,  detached  in 
1632,  from  the  adventurers  under  Warner.  Their 
separation  appears  indeed,  to  have  been  partly  oc¬ 
casioned  by  local  attachments  and  religious  dissen- 
tions;  which  rendered  their  situation  in  St.  Chris¬ 
topher’s  uneasy,  being  chiefly  natives  of  Ireland, 
of  the  Romish  persuasion.  The  same  causes,  how¬ 
ever,  operated  to  the  augmentation  of  their  num¬ 
bers  5  for  so  many  persons  of  the  same  country  and 


180  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  in, 

religion  adventured  thither  soon  after  the  first  set¬ 
tlement,  as  to  create  a  white  population  which  it 
has  ever  since  possessed ;  if  it  be  true,  as  asserted 
by  Oldmixon,-  that  at  the  end  of  sixteen  years, 
there  were  in  the  island  upwards  of  one  thousand 
white  families,  constituting  a  militia  of  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  sixty  effective  men. 

The  civil  history  of  this  little  island  contains  no¬ 
thing  very  remarkable.  It  was  invaded  by  a  French 
force  in  1712,  and  suffered  so  much  from  the  de¬ 
predations  of  that  armament,  that  an  article  was 
inserted  in  the  treaty  of  Utrecht  for  appointing  com¬ 
missioners  to  inquire  into  the  damages;  which, 
however,  were  not  made  good  to  the  sufferers.  It 
was  again  invaded,  and  with  most  of  the  other 
islands  captured  by  the  French,  in  the  late  War,  and 
restored  with  the  rest. 

Nothing  therefore  remains,  but  to  furnish  the 
reader  with  an  account  of  its  present  state  in  re¬ 
spect  of  cultivation,  productions,  and  exports. 

Montserrat  is  about  three  leagues  in  length,  and  as 
many  in  breadth,  and  is  supposed  to  contain  about 
thirty  thousand  acres  of  land,  of  which  almost  two- 
thirds  are  very  mountainous,  or  very  barren.  The 
land  in  cultivation  is  appropriated  nearly  as  follows. 
In  sugar,  six  thousand  acres  :  In  cotton,  provisions, 
and  pasturage,  two  thousand  each.  None  other  of 
the  tropical  staples  are  raised.  Its  average  crop 
from  1784  to  1788,  were  2,737  hogsheads  of  sugar 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES,  181 

of  sixteen  hundred  weight,  1,107  puncheons  of 
rum,  and  275  bales  of  cotton.  The  exports  of 
1787,  and  their  value  at  the  London  market,  will 
be  seen  in  a  table  annexed  to  this  chapter.  They 
are  produced  by  the  labour  of  one  thousand  three 
hundred  whites^  and  about  ten  thousand  negroes. 

The  government  is  administered  in  this,  as  in  the 
other  islands,  by  a  legislature  of  its  own,  under 
the  captain  general.  The  council  consists  of  six 
members,  and  the  assembly  of  eight,  two  from 
each  of  the  four  districts  into  which  it  is  divided  j 
and  the  proportion  wdiich  Montserrat  contributes 
to  the  salary  of  the  captain  general  is  J?.4C)0  per 
annum. 


APPENDIX. 


Since  the  Publication  of  the  forme?  Edition's  of  this  Work,  the  following  Paper  has  been  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons, 


An  Account  of  the  Duty  of  Four  and  a  Half  per  Centum,  arising  in  Barbadoes  and  the  Leeward  Islands,  in  America,  for 
the  Years  1794,  1795,  and  1796;  with  the  Amount  of  the  Charges  and  Payments  to  which  it  is  liable,  the  Net  Proceeds 
thereof,  with  the  Payments  into  the  Exchequer  by  the  Receiver  General  of  the  Customs . 
SECTION  V. 

VIRGIN  ISLANDS. 

Of  the  Virgin  Islands  I  have  so  few  particulars 
to  communicate,  that  I  fear  the  reader  will  accuse 
me  of  inattention  or  idleness  in  my  researches.  I 
have,  however,  solicited  information  of  those  who 
I  thought  were  most  likely  to  afford  it;  but  if  my 
inquiries  were  not  slighted,  my  expectations  were 
not  gratified.  Even  in  a  late  historical  account  by 
Mr.  Suckling,  the  chief  justice  of  these  islands,  I 
find  but  little  of  which  I  can  avail  myself.  It  fur¬ 
nishes  no  particulars  concerning  their  extent,  their 
cultivation,  or  their  commerce.  It  is  silent  as  to 
the  number  of  their  present  English  inhabitants. 
The  author  is  even  misinformed  as  to  the  origin  of 
their  present  name ;  for  he  supposes  that  it  was 
bestowed  upon  them  in  1580,  by  Sir  Francis  Drake, 
in  honour  of  queen  Elizabeth;  but  the  fact  is,  that 
these  islands  were  named  Las  Virgines  by  Colum¬ 
bus  himself,  who  discovered  them  in  1493,  and 
gave  them  this  appellation,  in  allusion  to  the  well- 
known  legend  in  the  Romish  ritual  of  the  11,000 
virgins. 

1  he  Spaniards  of  those  days,  however,  thought 
them  unworthy  of  further  notice.  A  century  after- 


1 84  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi, 

wards  (1596)  they  were  visited  by  the  earl  of  Cum¬ 
berland,  in  his  way  to  the  attack  of  Porto  Rico;  and 
the  historian  of  that  voyage,  whose  narrative  is  pre¬ 
served  in  Hakluyt’s  collection,  calls  them  “  a  knot 

of  little  islands,  wholly  uninhabited,  sandy,  barren, 

and  craggy.”  The  whole  group  may  comprehend 
about  forty  islands,  islots,  and  keys,  and  they  are 
divided  at  present  between  the  English,  the  Spani¬ 
ards,  and  Danes.  The  English  hold  Tortola,  and 
Virgin  Gorda,*  Josvan  Dykes,  Guana  Isle,  Beef 
•and  Thatch  islands,  Anegada,  Nichar,  Prickly  Pear, 
Camana’s,  Ginger,  Cooper’s,  Salt  island,  Peter’s 
Island,  and  several  others  of  little  value.  The 
Danes  possess  Santa  Cruz,*]*  St.  Thomas,  with 
about  twelve  smaller  islands  dependant  thereon, 
and  St.  John,  which  last  is  of  importance  as  having 
the  best  harbour  of  any  island  to  the  leeward  of 
Antigua,  and  the  Spaniards  claim  Crab  island,  the 
Green  or  Serpent  island,  the  Tropic  Keys,  and 
Great  and  Little  Passage. 

The  first  possessors  of  such  of  these  islands  as 
now  belong  to  the  British  government  were  a  par¬ 
ty  of  Dutch  buccaniers,  who  fixed  themselves  at 
Tortola  about  the  year  1648,  and  built  a  fort  there 

*  This  last  is  likewise  called  Penniston,  and  corruptly  Spanish 
Town.  It  has  two  very  good  harbours. 

f  St.  Croix,  or  Santa  Cruz,  belonged  originally  to  the  French,  and 
was  sold  by  them  to  the  Danes,  in  1733,  for  the  sum  of  £.75,000. 
Its  inhabitants  are  chiefly  English,  and  the  lands  being  exceedingly 
fertile,  the  produce  of  this  little  island  (most  of  which  I  believe  is 
smuggled  into  Great  Britain  as  the  produce  of  Tortola)  is  very  consi¬ 
derable,  particularly  sugar. 


chap.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  185 

for  their  protection.  In  1666,  they  were  driven 
out  by  a  stronger  party  of  the  same  adventurers, 
who,  calling  themselves  English,  pretended  to  take 
possession  for  the  crown  of  England*  and  the  Eng¬ 
lish  monarch,  if  he  did  not  commission  the  enter- 
prize,  made  no  scruple  to  claim  the  benefit  of  it; 
for  Tortola  and  its  dependencies  were  soon  after¬ 
ward®  annexed  to  the  Leeward  Island  government, 
in  a  commission  granted  by  king  Charles  II.  to  Sir 
William  Stapleton,  and  I  believe  that;  the  English 
title  has  remained  unimpeached  from  that  time  to 
this. 

The  Dutch  had  made  but  little  progress  in  culti¬ 
vating  the  country  when  they  were  expelled  from 
Tortola;  and  the  chief  merit  of  its  subequent  im¬ 
provements  was  reserved  for  some  English  settlers 
from  the  little  island  of  Anguilla,  who,  about  a 
century  past,  embarked  with  their  families  and  set¬ 
tled  in  the  Virgin  islands.  Their  wants  were  few, 
and  their  government  simple  and  unexpensive. 
The  deputy  governor,  with  a  council  nominated 
from  among  themselves,  exercised  both  the  legis¬ 
lative  and  judicial  authority,  determining,  in  a  sum¬ 
mary  manner,  without  a  jury,  all  questions  between 
subject  and  subject;  and  as  to  taxes  there  seem  to 
have  been  none  laid:  when  money  was  absolutely 
necessary  for  public  use,  it  was  raised,  I  believe  by 
voluntary  contribution. 

Under  such  a  system,  it  was  impossible  that  the 
colony  could  attain  to  much  importance.  It  want- 
Vol.  II. 


a  a 


i  86 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iii, 

ed  the  advantage  of  English  capitals  ;  but  credit  is 
sparingly  given  where  payment  cannot  be  easily  en¬ 
forced.  The  inhabitants  therefore,  whose  numbers 
in  1756  amounted  to  1,263  whites,  and  6,121 
blacks,  reasonably  hoped  to  be  put  on  the  same¬ 
footing  with  the  sister  islands,  by  the  establishment 
of  a  perfect  civil  government,  and  constitutional 
courts  of  justice  among  them ;  but  in  this  expecta¬ 
tion  they  were  not  gratified  until  the  year  1773. 
In  that  year  they  presented  an  humble  petition  to 
the  captain-general  of  the  Leeward  Island  govern¬ 
ment,  requesting  his  excellency  to  unite  with 
them  in  an  application  to  his  majesty,  for  permis¬ 
sion  to  elect  an  assembly  of  representatives  out  of 
the  freeholders  and  planters,,  in  order  that  such  as¬ 
sembly,  with  the  governor  and  council,'  might 
frame  proper  laws  for  their  peace,  welfare,  and 
good  government;  pledging  themselves ,  in  that 
case,  to  grant  to  his  Majesty,  his  heirs  and  succes¬ 
sors,  an  impost  of  four  and  an  half  per  centum,  in 
specie,  upon  all  goods  and  commodities  the  growth 
of  these  islands,  similar  to  that  which  was  paid  in 
the  other  Leeward  islands. 

Their  application  (thus  sweetened)  proved  suc¬ 
cessful.  It  was  signified  to  them,  that  his  majesty 
fully  considering  the  persons,  circumstances,  and 
condition  of  his  said  Virgin  islands,  and  the  neces¬ 
sity  there  was,  from  the  then  state  of  their  culture 
and  inhabitancy,  that  some  adequate  and  perfect 
form  of  civil  government  should  be  established 
therein;  “  and  finally  trusting  that  his  faithful  sub- 
ejects  in  his  said  Virgin  islands,  who  should  com- 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  187 

pose  the  new  assembly,  would,  as  the  first  act  of 
legislation,  cheerfully  make  good  the  engage- 
<c  ment  of  granting  to  his  majesty,  his  heirs  and 
successors,  the  impost  of  four  and  a  half  per 
fi  centum  on  all  the  produce  of  the  Virgin  islands, 
sc  to  be  raised  and  paid  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
four  and  a  half  per  centum  is  made  payable  in 
the  other  Leeward  Islands ,”  did  cause  his  royal 
pleasure  to  be  signified  to  the  governor  in  chief, 
that  he  should  issue  writs  in  his  majesty’s  name, 
for  convening  an  assembly  or  house  of  representa¬ 
tives,  who,  together  with  a  council,  to  be  com¬ 
posed  of  twelve  persons,  to  be  appointed  by  the 
governor  for  that  purpose,  might  frame  and  pass 
such  laws  as  should  be  necessary  for  the  welfare 
,and  good  government  of  the  said  islands. 

Accordingly,  on  the  30th  of  November  1773, 
the  governor  in  chief  of  the  Leeward  Islands,  in 
-obedience  to  his  majesty’s  orders,  issued  a  procla¬ 
mation  for  convening  an  assembly  or  house  of  rer 
presentatives  of  the  Virgin  Islands,  who  met  on 
the  1st  of  February  following,  and  very  honourably 
complied  with  their  engagement  to  the  crown;  the 
very  first  act  passed  by  them  being  the  grant  before 
mentioned  of  four  and  a  half  per  centum,  on  the 
produce  of  the  colony  for  ever.  They  afterwards 
passed  a  grant  of  JdAQO  currency  per  annum,  as 
their  proportion  towards  the  salary  of  the  governor 
general. 

Such  was  the  price  at  which  the  Virgin  islands 
purchased  the  establishment  of  a  constitutional  le* 


i88 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iii. 

gislature.  If  it  be  difficult  to  reconcile  this  prece¬ 
dent  with  the  doctrines  which  have  been  maintain¬ 
ed  in  the  case  of  Grenada,  it  may  perhaps  be  said, 
(as  I  believe  the  fact  was),  that  the  inhabitants  of 
these  islands  were  unapprised  of  the  rights  which 
they  inherited  as  British  subjects,  when  they  vo¬ 
luntarily  proposed  to  subject  themselves  and  their 
posterity  to  the  tax  in  question  for  permission  to 
enjoy  them;  and  their  posterity  may  perhaps  dis¬ 
pute  the  authority  which  their  forefathers  exercised 
on  this  occasion, 

v 

The  chief,  and  almost  the  only  staple  prodqm 
tions  of  these  islands  are  sugar  and  cotton.  Of  the 
quantity  of  land  appropriated  to  the  cultivation  of 
either,  I  have  no  account,  nor  can  I  venture  even 
to  guess,  at  the  quantity  of  unimproved  land  which 
may  yet  be  brought  into  cultivation:  Tortola  itself 
is  not  more  than  fifteen  miles  long,  and  six  miles 
broad;  the  exports  of  1787  will  presently  be  given, 
and  I  have  only  to  add,  that  they  were  raised  by 
the  labour  of  about  one  thousand  two  hundred 
whites,  and  nine  thousand  blacks. 

Having  so  far  treated  of  the  several  islands  which 
constitute  what  is  called  the  Leeward  Island  Go-^ 
vernment,  as  they  stand  distinct  from  each  other, 
1  close  my  account,  as  in  former  cases,  with  an  am 
thentic  Table  of  their  returns  for  1787 ;  after  which, 
I  shall,  as  proposed,  offer  a  few  observations  on  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  are  common  to  them  all. 


An  Account  of  the  Number  of  Vessels ,  Vc.  that  have  cleared  Outwards  from  the  Islands  of  St,  Christopher’s, 
Montserrat ,  Antigua ,  Nevis,  and  the  Virgin  Islands ,  between  the  5th  January  1787  and  the  5th  January 
1788  ;  together  with  an  Account  of  their  Cargoes,  and  the  Value  thereof. 
chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 


IN  surveying  these  islands  collectively,  the  cir¬ 
cumstance  that  first  presents  itself  to  notice  is  the 
burthen  of  the  four  and  a  half  per  centum  on  their 
exported  produce,  to  which  they  are  all  subject 
equally  with  Barbadoes,  and  which,  though  grant¬ 
ed  by  their  own  assemblies,  was  in  most  other 
cases,  as  well  as  the  Virgin  Islands,  the  price  of  a 
constitutional  legislature,  and  a  communication  of 
the  common  privileges  of  British  subjects. 

It  would  without  doubt  be  satisfactory  to  the 
reader  to  be  furnished  with  an  account  of  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  this  duty,  and  the  particulars  of  its  dispo¬ 
sal ;  but  no  such  information,  to  my  knowledge, 
has  of  late  years  been  given  to  the  public.  The 
last  return  that  I  am  possessed  of,  is  dated  so  long 
ago  as  the  year  1735.  From  thence  it  appears, 
that  the  whole  money  collected  on  this  account, 
both  in  Barbadoes  and  the  Leeward  Islands,  in 
twenty-one  years,  (from  Christmas  1713  to  Christ¬ 
mas  1734)  amounted  to  <£*. 326,529  2s.  3-id.  ster¬ 
ling,  of  which  it  is  shameful  to  relate,  that  no  more 
than  £.  140,032.  13s.  54-d.  was  paid  into  the  Bri¬ 
tish  exchequer ;  upwards  of  j£. 80,000  having  been 
retained  in  the  islands  for  the  charges  of  collecting. 


i  so  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

and  £.  105,000  more,  expended  in  Great  Britain  in 
the  payment  of  freight,  duties,  commissions,  fees 
of  office,  and  other  claims  and  deductions.* 

From  the  net  money  paid  into  the  exchequer, 
the  governor  general  of  these  islands  receives  a  sa~ 
Jary  of  j£.  1,200  sterling,  exclusive  of  the  several 
sums  granted  him  by  the  colonial  assemblies, f  and 
I  believe  that  salaries  are  allowed  from  the  same 
fund  to  the  lieutenant-general,  and  the  several  lieu¬ 
tenant  governors.  I  have  been  informed  too,  that 
the  governors  of  the  Bahama  and  Bermudas  islands 
are  likewise  paid  out  of  this  duty.  The  balance 
which  remains,  after  these  and  some  other  deduc¬ 
tions  are  made,  is  wholly  at  the  king’s  disposal. 

But  it  is  impossible  not  to  observe,  that  almost 
all  the  islands  within  this  government,  as  well  as 
Barbadoes,  have  been,  for  many  years  past,  pro¬ 
gressively  on  the  decline  ;  and  it  is  there  tore  pro¬ 
bable  that  the  present  net  produce  of  this  duty  is 
•not  more  than  sufficient  to  defray  the  several  in¬ 
cumbrances  with  which  it  is  loaded.  The  negroes 
Indeed  have  been  kept  up,  and  even  augmented. 


*  Some  years  after  this,  a  new  mode  of  collecting  the  duties  was, 
I  believe,  adopted,  which  rendered  the  tax  more  productive  to  go¬ 
vernment. 

f  These  grants  are  as  follow:  Antigua  and  St.  Christopher’s 
£.1,000  currency  each.  Nevis  £.400.  Montserrat  £.400.  Virgin 
Islands  £.400.  The  usual  rate  of  exchange  is  165  per  centum. 
These  sums  therefore,  added  to  £.1,000  sterling,  paid  out  of  the  ex¬ 
chequer,  make  his  whole  salary  £.3,000  sterling  per  annum. 


I  9  5 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 

by  purchase,  because,  as  the  lands  have  become 
impoverished,  they  have  required  a  greater  ex¬ 
pense  of  labour  to  make  them  any  way  produc¬ 
tive  ;  but  as  the  returns  have  not  increased  in  the 
same  degree,  nothing  could  have  saved  the  plan¬ 
ters  from  ruin,  but  the  advanced  price  of  sugar  in 
the  markets  of  Europe. 

It  appears  from  authentic  accounts  laid  betore 
parliament,  that  the  import  of  sugar  into  Great  Bri¬ 
tain  from  all  the  British  West  Indies,  (Jamaica  ex¬ 
cepted),  has  decreased  in  the  course  of  twenty 
years,  from  3,762,804  cwt.  to  2,563,228  cwt.* 
The  difference  in  value,  at  a  medium  price,  can¬ 
not  be  less  than  £. 400,000  sterling,  and  it  will  be 
found  to  have  fallen  chiefly  on  those  islands  which 

j 

are  subject  to  the  duty  in  question ;  to  the  effects 
of  which,  therefore,  the  deficiency  must  be  chiefly 
attributed  :  for  being  laid,  not  on  the  land,  but  on 
the  produce  of  the  land,  it  operates  as  a  tax  on 
industry,  and  a  penalty  which  falls  heaviest  on  the 
man  who  contributes  most  to  augment  the  wealth, 
commerce,  navigation,  and  revenues  ot  the  mo¬ 
ther-country.  It  is  considered  by  the  planters  as 
equal  to  ten  per  cent,  on  the  net  produce  ot  their 
estates  for  ever.  Under  such  a  burthen,  which 
while  it  oppresses  the  colonies,  yields  a  profit  of 
no  great  consideration  to  the  crown,  they  have 
been  unable  to  stand  a  competition  with  the  British 


*  Being  the  average  of  two  periods,  the  first  from  177a  to  1775, 
the  second  from  1788  to  1792. 


1 92  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  uu 

planters  in  the  other  islands,  and  have  been  de¬ 
pressed  still  more  by  the  rapid  growth  and  exten¬ 
sive  opulence  of  the  French  colonies  in  their  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  Thus  a  check  has  been  given  to  the 
spirit  of  improvement,  and  much  of  that  land, 
which  though  somewhat  impoverished  by  long 
cultivation,  would  still,  with  the  aid  of  manure, 
contribute  greatly  to  the  general  returns,  is  aban¬ 
doned,  because  the  produce  of  the  poorest  soil  is 
taxed  as  high  as  that  of  the  most  fertile. 

To  the  loss  arising  from  a  decrease  of  produce, 
accompanied  with  an  increase  of  contingent  ex¬ 
penses,  must  be  added  the  ruinous  effects  of  cap¬ 
ture  in  the  late  American  war.  The  damages 
sustained  in  St.  Christopher’s  alone,  by  De  Grasse  s 
invasion  in  1782,  from  the  destruction  of  negroes 
and  cattle,  and  the  burning  of  the  canes,  were 
estimated  at  £.  1 60,000  sterling,  which  sum  was 
made  up  to  the  sufferers  by  a  poll-tax  on  the  slaves, 
of  no  less  than  forty  shillings.  The  annual  taxes 
for  defraying  the  current  charges  of  their  inter¬ 
nal  governments,  in  all  the  islands,  are  also  ex¬ 
ceedingly  burthensome  ;  besides  parish  taxes  for 
the  repair  of  the  roads,  the  maintenance  of  the 
clergy,"  and  the  relief  of  the  poor. 

But  under  all  these  and  the  other  discourage¬ 
ments  which  are  felt  by  the  proprietors,  the  wealth 
which  still  flows  from  these  little  dependencies 
into  the  mother-country,  must  fill  every  reflecting 
mind  with  surprise  and  admiration.  An  extent  of 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  t93 

cultivated  territory,  not  equal  to  one  tenth  part 
of  the  county  of  Essex,  adding  yearly  one  million 
and  a  half  to  the  national  income,  is  a  circumstance, 
that  demonstrates  beyond  all  abstract  reasoning, 
the  vast  importance  to  Great  Britain,  of  having 
sugar  islands  of  her  own.  At  the  same  time,  it  is 
both  amusing  and  instructive  to  consider,  how  little 
the  present  returns  from  these  islands,  are  answer- 
able  to  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  their  first 
European  possessors ;  or  rather  it  affords  an  ani¬ 
mated  illustration  of  the  wisdom  of  Providence* 
which  frequently  renders  the  follies  and  weak¬ 
nesses  of  man  productive  of  good.  The  first 
English  adventurers  were  influenced  wholly  by  the 
hopes  of  opening  a  golden  fountain,  similar  to  that 
which  was  flowing  from  Peru  and  Mexico,  into 
Spain.  The  nation  was  told  of  countries  where  the 
mountains  were  composed  of  diamonds,  and  the  ci¬ 
ties  built  wholly  of  ingots  of  gold.  Such  were  the 
dreams  of  Cabot,  Frobisher,  and  Gilbert,  and  it  is 
a  lamentable  display  of  the  power  of  avarice  on  the 
human  mind,  to  behold  the  sagacious  and  learned 
Raleigh  bewildered  in  the  same  folly !  Experience 
has  at  length  corrected  this  frenzy,  and  Europe  is 
now  wise  enough  to  acknowledge,  that  gold  and 
silver  have  only  an  artificial  and  relative  values 
that  industry  alone  is  real  wealth,  and  that  agricul¬ 
ture  and  commerce  are  the  great  sources  of  nation¬ 
al  prosperity. 

The  produce  of  these  islands  however,  though 
of  such  value  to  the  mother-country,  is  raised  at  an 
Vol.  II.  b  b 


i94  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  m, 

expense  to  the  cultivator,  which  perhaps  is  not 
equalled  in  any  other  pursuit,  in  any  country  of  the 
globe.  It  is  an  expense  too,  that  is  permanent 
and  certain;  while  the  returns  are  more  variable 
and  fluctuating  than  any  other:  owing  to  calami¬ 
ties,  to  which  these  countries  are  exposed,  both 
from  the  hands  of  God  and  man;  and  it  is  mourn¬ 
ful  to  add,  that  the  selfish  or  mistaken  policy  of  man 
is  sometimes  more  destructive  than  even  the  anger 
of  Omnipotence! 

At  the  time  that  I  write  this  (1791),  the  huma¬ 
nity  of  the  British  nation  is  tremblingly  alive  to  the 
real  or  fictitious  distresses  of  the  African  labourers 
in  these  and  the  other  islands  of  the  West  Indies : 
and  the  holders  and  employers  of  those  people, 
seem  to  be  marked  out  to  the  public  indignation 
for  proscription  and  ruin.  So  strong  and  universal  a 
sympathy  allows  no  room  for  the  sober  exercise  of 
reason,  or  it  would  be  remembered,  that  the  condi¬ 
tion' of  that  unfortunate  race,  must  depend  greatly 
on  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  their  owners. 
Oppression  towards  the  principal,  will  be  felt  with 
double  force  by  his  dependants,  and  the  blow  tit  at 
wounds  the  master*  will  exterminate  the  slave. 

The  propriety  of  these  remarks  will  be  seen  in 
subsequent  parts  of  my  work,  when  I  come,  in 
course,  to  treat  of  the  slave  trade  and  slavery ;  and 
to  consider  the  commercial  system  of  Great  Britain 
towards  her  West  Indian  dependencies,  of  which  I 
have  now  completed  the  catalogue.  Here  then  I 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  195 

might  close  the  third  book  of  my  history ;  but  it 
has  probably  occurred  to  the  reader,  that  I  have 
omitted  the  two  governments  of  Bahama  and  Ber¬ 
mudas-*  to  which  indeed  it  was  my  intention, 
when  I  began  my  work,  to  appropriate  a  distinst 
chapter.  An  examination  of  my  materials  has  in¬ 
duced  me  to  alter  my  purpose  ;  finding  myself  pos¬ 
sessed  of  scarce  any  memorials  concerning  the  civil 
history  of  those  islands,  that  are  not  given  in  the 
numerous  geographical  treatises  with  which  the 
shelves  of  the  booksellers  are  loaded.  Of  the  pre¬ 
sent  state  of  the  Bahama  islands,  I  need  not  be 
ashamed  to  acknowledge  my  ignorance,  inasmuch 
as  even  the  lords  of  the  committee  of  council  for  the 
affairs  of  trade  and  plantations,  were  unable  to  ob¬ 
tain  satisfactory  information  concerning  it.  To  their 
lordships  inquiries,  in  1786,  as  to  the  extent  of 
territory  in  those  islands, — the  quantity  of  land  in 
cultivation, — the  number  of  white  inhabitants, — 
productions,  and  exports,  & c.  the  only  answer  that 
could  be  obtained  from  the  Governor  was  this, 
that  it  teas  at  that  time  impossible  to  ascertain  any 
of  those  particulars.  It  appears,  however,  from 
the  testimony  of  other  persons,  that  these  islands 
in  general  are  rocky  and  barren;  that  the  only  arti¬ 
cle  cultivated  for  exportation  is  cotton,  of  which 
the  medium  export  is  fifteen  hundred  bags  of  two 
cwt.  that  thje  inhabitants  (who  in  1773  consisted  pf 

*  I  have  also  passed  over  unnoticed  the  small  islands  of  Anguilla 
and  Barbuda,  as  being  of  too  little  importance  ,to  merit  particular 
■description.  The  former  belongs  to  the  Leeward  Island  government ; 
the  latter  is  the  private  property  of  the  Codrington  family. 


1 96  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m. 

two  thousand  and  fifty-two  whites,  and  two  thou¬ 
sand  two  hundred  and  forty-one  blacks)  have  been 
of  late  years  considerably  augmented  by  emigrants 
from  North  America ;  but  of  their  present  numbers 
no  precise  account  is  given.* 

Concerning  Bermudas,  governor  Brown  is  more 
explicit.  From  his  answers  to  their  lordships’  que^ 
ries,  it  appears,  that  they  contain  from  twelve  to 
thirteen  thousand  acres  of  very  poor  land,  of  which 
nine  parts  in  ten  are  either  uncultivated,  or  reserved 
in  woods  for  the  supplying  of  timber  for  building 
small  ships,  sloops,  and  shallops  for  sale ;  this  be-r 
ing  in  truth  the  principal  occupation  and  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  inhabitants;  and  the  vessels  which 
they  furnish,  being  built  of  cedar,  are  light,  buoy¬ 
ant,  and  unexpensive. 

Of  the  land  in  cultivation,  no  part  was  appropri¬ 
ated  to  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  raising  In¬ 
dian  corn,  and  esculent  roots  and  vegetables,  (of 
which  a  considerable  supply  is  sent  to  the  West 
Indian  islands),  until  the  year  1785,  when  the 
growth  of  cotton  was  attempted,  but  with  no 

*  The  Bahama  islands,  comprehending  those  which,  either  front 
their  smallness,  the  barrenness  of  the  soil,  or  the  want  of  water,  are 
■uninhabited,  are  some  hundreds  in  number.  They  are  situated  be¬ 
tween  the  2zd  and  23d  degrees  of  north  latitude.  The  principal  of 
them  are  Providence,  (twenty-seven  miles  long  and  eleven  broad), 
Bahama,  Abaco,  Harbour  Island,  Eluthera,  Exuma,  St.  Salvador?, 
Long  Island,  Andros,  Bimini,  &c.  The  seat  of  government  is  at  the 
town  of  Nassau  in  Providence.  Vid.  vol,  i.  p.  5. 


CHAP.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  1 9j 

great  success,  there  not  being  at  present  more 
than  two  hundred  acres  applied  in  this  line  of 
culture. 

The  number  of  white  people  of  all  ages  in  Ber¬ 
mudas  is  live  thousand  four  hundred  and  sixty-two; 
of  blacks  four  thousand  nine  hundred  and  nine¬ 
teen.* 

Thus  it  appears,  that  the  lands  become  less  fertile 
as  we  recede  from  the  tropicks,  and  were  there  not, 
as  there  certainly  is,  an  unaccountable  propensity 
in  the  greater  part  of  mankind,  to  under-rate  what 
they  have  in  actual  possession,  it  would  require  but 


'*  It  were  an  act  of  great  injustice  to  the  inhabitants  of  Bermudas, 
to  omit  the  very  honourable  testimony  which  governor  Brown  has 
transmitted  to  government,  concerning  the  treatment  of  their  negro 
slaves.  “  Nothing  (he  observes)  can  better  shew  the  state  of  slavery 
in  Bermudas  than  the  behaviour  of  the  blacks  in  the  late  war.  There 
were  at  one  time  between  fifteen  and  twenty  privateers  fitted  out  from 
hence,  which  were  partly  manned  by  negro  slaves,  who  behaved  both 
as  sailors  and  marines  irreproachably ;  and  whenever  they  were  cap¬ 
tured,  always  returned,  if  it  was  in  their  power.  There  were  seve¬ 
ral  instances  wherein  they  had  been  condemned  with  the  vessel  and 
sold,  and  afterwards  found  means  to  escape,  and  through  many  dif¬ 
ficulties  and  hardships  returned  to  their  master’s  service.  In  the  ship 
Regulator,  a  privateer,  there  were  seventy  slaves.  She  was  taken  and 
carried  into  Boston.  Sixty  of  them  returned  in  a  flag  of  truce  di¬ 
rectly  to  Bermudas.  Nine  others  returned  by  the  way  of  New-York. 
One  only  was  missing,  who  di^I  in  the  cruize,  or  in  captivity.” 

Report  of  the  Privy  Council  on  the 
Slave  Trade,  Part  III. 


I9S  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  hi. 

little  effort  to  convince  the  public,  of  the  vast  im¬ 
portance  of  our  West  Indian  dependencies ;  of 
which  the  progressive  growth  has  now  been  traced 
from  the  first  settlement.  What  remains  is  to  con¬ 
vey  that  conviction  to  the  English  reader.  This 
then,  after  taking  a  cursory  survey,  for  the  gratifi¬ 
cation  of  curiosity,  of  the  present  inhabitants  and 
the  system  of  agriculture,  I  shall  endeavour  to  ac¬ 
complish. 


THE  HISTORY, 

CIVIL  AND  COMMERCIAL, 

OF  THE 

BRITISH  COLONIES 

IN  THE 

WEST  INDIES. 


BOOK  IV. 

PRESENT  INHABITANTS. 


y'j'y'xyy'yy' 


CHAPTER  I. 

Summary  account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  several 
Islands. —  Classes. — Emigrants  from  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland. — Predominant  character  of  the  European 
residents. — Creoles  or  Natives .- — Effects  of  climate. — • 
Character  of  the  Creole  Women  and  Children. — Of  the 
people  of  Colour ,  and  their  different  tribes  or  casts. — 
Limitations  and  restrictions  on  the  Mulattoes  and  native 
Blacks  of  free  condition. — Their  character  at  length , 
Concluding  with  an  Ode  to  the  Sable  Venus. 

THE  present  state  (1791)  of  the  population 
in  the  British  West  Indies  appears,  on  a  sura- 
mary  of  the  several  accounts  given  in  former  parts 
of  this  work,  to  be  as  follows,  viz. 
HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  rtf* 

It  may  reasonably  be  supposed  that  most  of  the 
natives  of  Europe  who  emigrate  to  the  West  In¬ 
dies,  remove  thither  with  the  hope  of  receiving- 
greater  encouragement  to  their  abilities  and  indus¬ 
try  than  has  offered  at  home;  Yet  let  it  not  be 
imagined  that  the  major,,  or  even  any  considerable 
part  of  them,  are  desperate  and  needy  adventurers, 
who  seek  refuge  from  a  prison,  or  expatriate  them¬ 
selves  in  the  fond  idea  of  living  luxuriously  with¬ 
out  labour.  These  islands  give  but  little  counte¬ 
nance  to  idleness,'  nor  offer  any  asylum  to  vaga¬ 
bonds  and  fugitives.  Many  of  the  British  colonies 
were  originally  composed  of  men  who  sought,  in 
fhe  wildernesses  of  the  New  World,  the  peaceable 
enjoyment  of  those  natural,'  or  supposed  rights,  of 
which  they  were  deprived  in  their  native  country. 
I  extend  this  description  to  persons'  of  opposite  po¬ 
litical  sentiments  and  connections,  to  loyalists  as 
well  as  to  republicans:  for  it  is  hoped,  that  some  of 
each  party  were  men  whose  principles  were  honest, 
though  their  conduct  might  have  been  wrong. 
The  advocates  of  loyalty  sought  refuge  chiefly  in 
Barbadoes,  and  many  of  the  adherents  of  Crom¬ 
well,.  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  found  pro¬ 
tection' in  Jamaica.  At  present,  among  the  num¬ 
bers  whom  accident  or  choice  conducts  to  the  Bri¬ 
tish  West  Indies,  the  juniors  in  the  learned  profes¬ 
sions  of  law,,  physic,  and  divinity,  constitute  a  con¬ 
siderable  body.  These  men  ought  to  be,  and,  ge¬ 
nerally  speaking,  really  are,  persons  of  education 
and  morals.  Few  places  afford  greater  encourage¬ 
ment  to  the  first  and  second  of  these  employments^. 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


203 


and,  as  ability  is  fostered  and  called  forth  by  exer¬ 
cise,  no  part  of  the  British  dominion  has,  in  my 
opinion,  produced  abler  men  ip  either  (in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  number)  than  these  islands.  Local 
prejudice,  and  bigotry  towards  great  names,  may 
perhaps  incline  some  persons  to  dispute  this  asser¬ 
tion  ;  but  prejudice  and  bigotry  apart,  it  will  be 
found,  I  belie-ve,  that  nature  has  distributed  the 
gifts  of  genius  more  equally  and  generally  than  is 
commonly  imagined:  it  is  cultivation  .and  favour 
that  ripen  and  bring  them  to  perfection.  The  Bri¬ 
tish  navy  and  army  likewise  contribute  considerably 
to  the  augmentation  of  the  white  inhabitants.  In¬ 
dividuals  in  both  these  professions,  either  from  the 
inducement  of  agreeable  connections,  which  it 
would  be  strange  if  .many  of  them  did  not  form  in 
a  long  residence  in  these  ^countries,  or  captivated 
by  the  new  prospects  which  open  to  their  contem¬ 
plation,  very  frequently  quit  the  business  of  arms, 
and  the  dangers  of  a  tempestuous  element,  and 
become  peaceful  citizens  and  Industrious  planters. 
Next  to  these  may  he  reckoned  the  mercantile  part 
of  the  inhabitants,  such  as  factors,  store-keepers, 
book-keepers,  and  clerks ;  who  are  followed  by 
tradesmen  and  artificers  of  various  kinds,  such  as 
millwrights,  carpenters,  masons,  coppersmiths,  and 
others;  most  of  whom,  .either  through  accident  or 
necessity,  after  some  years  residence,  become  ad¬ 
venturers  in  the  soil.  Then  come  the  husbandmen, 
or  cultivators  of  the  land,  professedly  such;  who 
are  commonly  distinguished  by  the  appellation  of 
managers,  overseers,  and  plantation  book-keepers,; 


/ 


204  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv 

■  « 

and  they  constitute  a  numerous  body  of  people, 
composed  of  men  of  all  countries  and  characters; 
for,  unfortunately,  every  enterprising  adventurer, 
who  has  either  learned  no  particular  trade,  or  has 
been  brought  up  to  one  which  is  useless  in  these 
regions,  fancies  himself  capable  of  speedily  acqui¬ 
ring  all  the  various  knowledge  of  the  sugar  planter, 
and  the  right  management  and  government  of  his 
fellow-creatures,  the  negroes;  though  in  truth  a 
more  weighty  charge  in  itself,  and  one  more  im¬ 
portant  in  its  consequences,  can  scarcely  fall  to  the 
lot  of  man, 

I  have,  I  think,  in  a  former  place,  assigned  the 
causes  to  which  it  is  partly  ascribable,  that  emi¬ 
grants  from  various  parts  of  the  mother  country, 
successively  constitute  the  bulk  of  the  sugar  colo¬ 
nists;  of  whom  it  is  certain,  that  the  major  part  re¬ 
tain,  in  a  considerable  degree,  the  manners  and  ha¬ 
bits  of  life  in  which  they  were  educated.  Yet, 
there  are  authors,  who  affect  to  describe  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  all  the  West  Indies  as  a  herd  of  criminals 
and  convicts;  and  cite  the  stale  crimes  and  violences, 
of  lawless  men,  a  century  ago,  when  these  islands 
were  the  rendezvous  of  pirates  and  bucaniers,  as  a 
just  representation  of  the  reigning  colonial  habits, 
manners,  and  dispositions ! 

Calumnies  so  gross  defeat  themselves  by  their 
absurdity; — but  although  it  is  in  the  highest  degree- 
ridiculous  to  imagine,  that  a  voyage  across  the  At¬ 
lantic  creates  any  sudden  or  radical  change  in  the  hu- 


CHAP.  I.  ]  WEST  INDIES.  205 

man  mind,  yet,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  just 
observed  concerning  local  manners  and  habits  in  the 
different  classes  of  European  settlers,  it  cannot  be 
denied,  that  there  prevails  besides,  something  of  a 
marked  and  predominant  character  common  to  all 
the  white  residents. 

Of  this  character  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  lead¬ 
ing  feature  is  an  independent  spirit,  and  a  display 
of  conscious  equality,  throughout  all  ranks  and 
conditions.  The  poorest  white  person  seems  to 
consider  himself  nearly  on  a  level  with  the  richest, 
and,  emboldened  by  this  idea,  approaches  his  em¬ 
ployer  with  extended  hand,  and  a  freedom,  which, 
in  the  countries  of  Europe,  is  seldom  displayed  by 
men  in  the  lower  orders  of  life  towards  their  supe¬ 
riors.  It  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  origin  of  this 
principle.  It  arises,  without  doubt,  from  the  pre¬ 
eminence  and  distinction  which  are  necessarily  at¬ 
tached  even  to  the  complexion  of  a  white  man,  in 
a  country  where  the  complexion,  generally  speak¬ 
ing,  distinguishes  freedom  from  slavery.  Of  the 
two  great  classes  of  people  in  most  of  these  co¬ 
lonies,  the  blacks  out  number  the  whites  in  the 
proportion  of  seven  to  one.  As  a  sense  of  com¬ 
mon  safety  therefore  unites  the  latter  in  closer 
ties  than  are  necessary  among  men  who  are  dif¬ 
ferently  situated,  so  the  same  circumstance  neces¬ 
sarily  gives  birth  among  them  to  reciprocal  depen- 
dance  and  respect.  Other  causes  contribute  to  the 
same  end.  “  Where  slavery”  (says  a  great  judge 
of  human  nature)  “  is  established  in  any  part  of  the 


so‘6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  rv. 

•*  world,  those  who  are  free,  are  by  far  the  most 
«  proud  and  jealous  of  their  freedom.  Freedom 
«  is  to  them  not  only  an  enjoyment,  but  a  kind  of 
ec  rank  and  privilege.  Not  seeing  there  that,  free- 
«  dom,  as  in  countries  where  it  is  a  common  bless- 
«  ing,  may  be  united  with  much  abject  toil,  with 
«  great  misery,  with  all  the  exterior  of  servitude, 
“  liberty  looks  among  them  like  something  that  is 
«  more  noble  and  liberal.  Thus,  the  people  of  the 
tc  southern  colonies  of  America,  are  much  more 
“  strongly,  and  with  a  higher  and  more  stubborn 
«  spirit,  attached  to  liberty,  than  those  to  the 
*e  northward.  Such  were  all  the  ancient  common- 
ec  wealths ;  such  were  our  Gothic  ancestors ;  such 

in  our  days  are  the  Poles;  and  such  will  be  all 
*e  masters  of  slaves,  who  are  not  slaves  them- 
4{  selves.’’* 

Possibly  too,  the  climate  itself,  by  increasing 
sensibility,  contributes  to  create  an  impatience  of 
subordination.  But  whatever  may  be  the  cause  of 
this  consciousness  of  self  importance  in  the  "West 
Indian  character,  the  consequences  resulting  from 
it  are,  on  the  whole,  beneficial.  If  it  sometimes 
produces  an  ostentatious  pride,  and  a  ridiculous  af¬ 
fectation  of  splendour,  it  more  frequently  awakens 
the  laudable  propensities  of  our  nature — frankness, 
sociability,  benevolence,  and  generosity.  In  no 
part  of  the  globe  is  the  virtue  of  hospitality  more 
generally  prevalent,  than  in  the  British  Sugar 


*  Burke’s  Speech  in  Parliament,  %z  March,  1773. 


€»a*.  rj  WEST  INDIES.  207 

Islands.  The  gates  of  the  planter  are  always  open 
to  the  reception  of  his  guests.  To  be  a  stran¬ 
ger  is  of  itself  a  sufficient  introduction.  This  spe¬ 
cies  of  hospitality  is  indeed  carried  so  far,  that,  as. 
Mr.  Long  has  remarked,  there  is  not  one  tolerable- 
inn  throughout  all  the  West  Indies.* 

To  the  same  cause  may  perhaps  be  ascribed,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  eagerness  for  litigation  and  ju¬ 
ridical  controversy,  which  so  remarkably  predomi¬ 
nates  in  most  of  these  islands.  From  this  unfortu- 

*  There  are  some  peculiarities  in  the  habits  of  life  of  the  white  in¬ 
habitants  which  cannot  fail  to  catch  the  eye  of  an  European  newly  ar¬ 
rived  ;  one  of  which  is  the  contrast  between  the  general  plenty  and 
magnificence  of  their  tables  (at  least  in  Jamaica)  and  the  meanness  of 
their  houses  and  apartments  ;  it  being  no  uncommon  thing  to  find,  at 
the  country  habitations  of  the  planters,  a  splendid  sideboard  loaded 
with  plate  and  the  choicest  wines,  a  table  covered  with  the  finest- 
damask,  and  a  dinner  of  perhaps  sixteen  or  twenty  covers ;  and  all 
this  in  a  hovel  not  superior  to  an  English  barn.  A  stranger  cannot 
fail,  also,  to  observe  a  strange  incongruity  and  inconsistency  between 
the  great  number  of  negro  domestics,  and  their  appearance  and  appa¬ 
rel.  The  butler  (and  he  but  seldom)  is  the  only  attendant  that  is  al¬ 
lowed  the  luxury  of  shoes  and  stockings.  All  the  others,  and  there 
is  commonly  one  to  each  guest,  wait  at  table  in  bare-footed,  majesty, 
some  of  them  perhaps  half  naked.  Another  peculiarity  in  the  man¬ 
ners  of  the  English  in  the  West  Indies  (in  Jamaica  especially)  is  the 
number  of  nautical  expressions  in  their  conversation.  Thus  they  say, 
hand  such  a  thing ,  instead  ef  bring  or  give  it.  A  plantation  well 
stocked  with  negroes,  is  said  to  be  <vjeU  handed :  an  office  or  employ¬ 
ment  is  called  a  birth ;  the  kitchen  is  denominated  the  cook-room  j  a 
warehouse  is  called  a  store ,  or  store-room ;  a  sopha  is  called  a  cot-,  a 
waistcoat  is  termed  a  jacket  -,  and  in  speaking  of  the  East  and  West,, 
they  say  to  nvindnvard  and  leeivard.  This  language  has  probably 
prevailed  since  the  days  of  the  bucaniers. 


2o B  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iV. 

nate  passion,  ruinous  as  it  frequently  proves  to  in¬ 
dividuals,  this  advantage,  however,  results  to  the 
community  at  large;  that  the  lower  orders  of  men, 
from  their  frequent  attendance  at  the  courts  of  law 
as  jurymen,  acquire  a  degree  of  knowledge,  and  a 
clearness  and  precision  of  reasoning,  which  are  not 
generally  to  be  found  in  men  of  the  same  rank  in 
England.  Thus  the  petty  juries  in  the  West  In¬ 
dies  are  commonly  far  more  intelligent  and  respect¬ 
able  than  those  in  Great  Britain.  Every  candid  per¬ 
son,  who  has  attended  the  courts  of  criminal  juris¬ 
diction  in  both  countries,  must  confirm  this  obser¬ 
vation. 

But  it  is  to  the  Creoles  or  natives,  that  we  must 
look  for  the  original  and  peculiar  cast  of  character 
impressed  by  the  climate,  if  indeed  the  influence 
of  climate  be  such  as  many  writers  imagine.  For 
myself,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  climate  of  the 
West  Indies  displays  itself  more  strongly  on  the  per¬ 
sons  of  the  natives,  than  on  their  manners,  or  on 
the  faculties  of  their  minds.  They  are  obviously  a 
taller  race,  on  the  whole,  then  the  Europeans ;  but 
I  think  in  general  not  proportionably  robust.  I  have 
known  several  who  were  full  six  feet  four  inches 
in  height ;  but  they  wanted  bulk,  to  meet  our 
ideas  of  masculine  beauty.  All  of  them,  however, 
are  distinguished  for  the  freedom  and  suppleness  of 
their  joints  ;  which  enable  them  to  move  with  great 
ease  and  agility,  as  well  as  gracefulness  in  dancing. 
From  the  same  cause  they  excel  in  penmanship, 
and  the  use  of  the  small  sword.  It  has  been  truly 


CHAP.  I.]  WEST  INDIES,  209 

observed,  that  the  effect  of  climate  is  likewise  ob¬ 
vious  in  the  structure  of  the  eye,  the  socket  being 
considerably  deeper  than  among  the  natives  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  By  this  conformation,  they  are  guarded  from 
those  ill  effects  which  an  almost  continual  strong 
glare  of  sun-shine  might  otherwise  produce;  and 
it  is  a  curious  circumstance,  that  their  skin  feels 
considerably  colder  than  that  of  a  European;  a 
proof,  I  think,  that  nature  has  contrived  some 
peculiar  means  of  protecting  them  from  the  heat* 
which  she  has  denied  to  the  nations  of  temperate 
regions,  as  unnecessary.  Accordingly,  though  their 
mode  of  living  differs  in  no  respect  from  that  of 
the  European  residents,  they  are  rarely  obnoxious 
to  those  inflammatory  disorders  which  frequently 
prove  fatal  to  the  latter. 

The  ladies  of  these  islands  have  indeed  greater 
cause  to  boast  of  this  fortunate  exemption,  than 
the  men;  a  pre-eminence  acquired  undoubtedly  by 
the  calm  and  even  tenour  of  their  lives,  and  by  an 
habitual  temperance  and  self-denial.  Except  the 
exercise  of  dancing,  in  which  they  delight  and  ex¬ 
cel,  they  have  no  amusement  or  avocation  to  impel 
them  to  much  exertion  of  either  body  or  mind. 
Those  midnight  assemblies  and  gambling  conven¬ 
tions,  wherein  health,  fortune,  and  beauty,  are  so 
frequently  sacrificed  in  the  cities  of  Europe,  are 
here  happily  unknown.  In  their  diet,  the  creole 
women  are,  I  think,  abstemious  even  to  a  fault. 
Simple  water,  or  lemonade,  is  the  strongest  beve¬ 
rage  in  which  they  indulge ;  and  a  vegetable  mess 

Vol.  IT.  jd  d 


210 


HISTORY  OF  'f  HE  [sook  iv. 

at  noon,  seasoned  with  Cayenne  pepper,  consti¬ 
tutes  their  principal  repast.  The  effect  of  this 
mode  of  life,  in  a  hot  and  oppressive  atmosphere, 
is  a  lax  fibre,  and  a  complexion  in  which  the  lily 
predominates  rather  than  the  rose.  To  a  stranger 
newly  arrived,  the  ladies  appear  as  just  risen  from 
the  bed  of  sickness.  Their  voice  is  soft  and  spirit¬ 
less,  and  every  step  betrays  languor  and  lassitude. 
With  the  finest  persons,  they  certainly  want  that 
glow  of  health  in  the  countenance,  that  delicious 
crimson  ( hunen  purpureum  juventa )  which,  in  cold¬ 
er  countries,  enlivens  the  coarsest  set  of  features, 
and  renders  a  beautiful  one  irresistible. 

Youth’s  orient  bloom,  the  blush  of  chaste  desire, 

The  sprightly  converse,  and  the  smile  divine, 

(Love’s  gentler  train),  to  milder  climes  retire, 

And  full  in  Albion’s  matchless  daughters  shine. 

In  one  of  the  principal  features  of  beauty,  how¬ 
ever,  few  ladies  surpass  the  creoles  ;  for  they  have, 
in  general,  the  finest  eyes  of  any  women  in  the 
world;  large,  languishing,  and  expressive;  some¬ 
times  beaming  with  animation,  and  sometimes  melt- 
ins:  with  tenderness;  a  sure  index  to  that  native 

o  ^  #  .  •  r 

goodness  of  heart  and  gentleness  of  disposition  for 
which  they  are  eminently  and  deservedly  applauded, 
and  to  which  combined  with  their  system  of  life  and 
manners  (sequestered,  domestic,  and  unobtrusive), 
it  is  doubtless  owing,  that  no  women  on  earth 
make  better  wives,  or  better  mothers.* 

*  The  creole  ladles  are  noted  for  very  fine  teeth,  which  they  pre¬ 
serve  and  keep  beautifully  white  by  a  constant  use  of  the  juice  of  a 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  an 

Perhaps  the  circumstance  most  distinguishable  in 
the  character  of  the  natives  to  which  the  climate 
seems  to  contribute  is  the  early  display  of  the  mental 
powers  in  young  children ;  whose  quick  perception, 
and  rapid  advances  in  knowledge,  exceed  those  of 
European  infants  of  the  same  age,  in  a  degree  that 
is  perfectly  unaccountable  and  astonishing.  This  cir¬ 
cumstance  is,  indeed,  too  striking  to  have  escaped 
the  notice  of  any  one  writer  who  has  visited  the 
tropical  parts  of  America ;  and  the  fact  being  too 
well  established  to  be  denied,  the  philosophers  of 
Europe  have  consoled  themselves  with  an  idea  that, 
as  the  genius  of  the  young  West  Indians  attains 
sooner  to  maturity,  it  declines  more  rapidly  than 
that  of  Europeans.  Nature  is  supposed  to  act  in 
this  case  in  a  manner  analogous  to  her  operations  in 
the  vegetable  kingdom,  where  the  trees  that  come 
soonest  to  perfection,  are  at  the  same  time  less 
firm  and  durable  than  those  which  require  more 
time  for  the  completion  of  their  growth.  It  is  in¬ 
deed  certain,  that  the  subsequent  acquirements  of 
the  mind  in  the  Natives,  do  not  always  keep  pace 
with  its  early  progress ;  but  the  chief  cause  (as 
Ulloa  hath  observed)  of  the  short  duration  of  such 
promising  beginnings,  seems  to  be  the  want  of 
proper  objects  for  exercising  the  faculties.  The 
propensity  also,  which  the  climate  undoubtedly  en¬ 
courages,  to  early  and  habitual  licentiousness,  in¬ 


withe  called  the  Chew-sfick  ;  a  species  of  rhamnus.  It  is  cut  into 
small  pieces,  and  used  as  a  tooth  brush.  The  juic?  is  a  strong  bitter, 
and  a  powerful  detergent. 


£512 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  it. 

duces  a  turn  of  mind  and  disposition  unfriendly  to 
mental  improvement.  Among  such  of  the  natives, 
as  have  happily  escaped  the  contagion  and  enerva¬ 
ting  effects  of  youthful  excesses,  men  are  found  of 
capacities  as  strong  and  permanent,  as  among  any 
people  whatever, 

As  I  cannot  therefore  admit,  that  the  Creoles  in 
general  possess  less  capacity  and  stability  of  mind 
than  the  natives  of  Europe,  much  less  can  I  allow, 
that  they  fall  short  of  them  in  those  qualities  of 
the  heart  which  render  man  a  blessing  to  all  around 
him.  Generosity  to  each  other,  and  a  high  degree 
of  compassion  and  kindness  towards  their  inferiors 
and  dependants,  distinguish  the  Creoles  in  a  very 
honourable  manner  A  If  they  are  proud,  their  pride 
is  allied  to  no  meanness,  Instructed  from  their 
infancy  to  entertain  a  very  high  opinion  of  their 
own  consequence,  they  are  cautious  of  doing  any 
act  which  may  lessen  the  consciousness  of  their 
proper  dignity.  From  the  same  cause  they  scorn 
evqry  species  of  concealment.  They  have  a  frank¬ 
ness  of  disposition  beyond  any  people  on  earth. 
Their  confidence  is  unlimited  and  entire.  Superior 
to  falsehood  themselves,  they  suspect  it  not  in 
others. 


*  i(  Adventurers  from  Europe  are  universally  more  cruel  and  rao- 
**  rose  towards  the  slaves  than  the  creoles  or  native  West  Indians.” 

Ramsay,  Essay  on  the  Treatment  and  Conversion  of  the 
Slaves,  &c, 


/ 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  213 

How  far  this  nobleness  of  disposition  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  influence  of  a  genial  climate,  and 
how  far  to  education  and  example,  I  presume  not 
to  discriminate.  The  effects  of  heat  on  the  body 
are  sufficiently  visible;  but  perhaps  philosophers 
have  relied  too  much  on  a  supposed  sympathy  be¬ 
tween  the  body  and  mind.  The  natives  of  hot 
climates”  (says  one  writer)  “  are  slothful  and 
timid;”  but  timidity  is  by  no  means  the  necessary 
consequence  of  indolence.  The  mind  may  require 
great  force  to  rouse  it  to  due  exertion ;  but,  being 
properly  urged  may  display  qualities  very  opposite 
to  those  of  a  timid  disposition.  At  least,  timidity 
constitutes  no  part  of  the  character  of  the  natives 
'of  the  British  West  Indies.  Indolence  I  admit  is 
too  predominant  among  them;  but  that  they  are 
deficient  in  personal  courage,  no  man,  who  has  the 
smallest  acquaintance  with  them,  will  allow  for  a 
moment.  Even  the  indolence  of  which  they  are  ac¬ 
cused,  is  rather  an  aversion  to  serious  thought  and 
deep  reflection,  than  a  slothfulness  and  sluggishness 
of  nature.  Both  sexes,  when  the  springs  of  the 
mind  are  once  set  in  motion,  are  remarkable  for  a 
warm  imagination  and  a  high  flow  of  spirits.  There 
seems  indeed  universally  to  reign  among  them  a 
promptitude  for  pleasure.  This  effect  has  been 
ascribed,  and  perhaps  justly,  to  the  levity  of  the  at¬ 
mosphere.*  To  the  same  cause  is  commonly  im¬ 
puted  the  propensity  observable  in  most  of  the 

*  .hlosely  on  the  Climate  of  the  West  Indies. 


214 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

West  Indians  to  indulge  extravagant  ideas  of  their 
riches  3  to  view  their  circumstances  through  a  mag¬ 
nifying  medium,  and  to  feast  their  fancies  on  what 
another  year  will  effect.  This  anticipation  of  ima¬ 
ginary  wealth  is  so  prevalent  as  to  become  justly 
ridiculous  ;  yet  I  am  inclined  to  think  it  is  a  pro¬ 
pensity  that  exists  independent  of  the  climate  and 
atmosphere,  and  that  it  arises  principally  from  the 
peculiar  situation  of  the  W est  Indian  planters  as 
land-holders.  Not  having,  like  the  proprietors  of 
landed  estates  in  Great  Britain,  frequent  opportu¬ 
nities  of  letting  their  plantations  to  substantial  te¬ 
nants,  they  are,  for  the  most  part,  compelled  to  be¬ 
come  practical  farmers  on  their  own  lands,  of 
which  the  returns  are,  in  the  highest  degree,  fluc¬ 
tuating  and  uncertain.  Under  these  circumstances, 
a  West  Indian  property  is  a  species  of  lottery.  As 
such,  it  gives  birth  to  a  spirit  of  adventure  and 
enterprise,  and  awakens  extravagant  hopes  and  ex¬ 
pectations  ; — too  frequently  terminating  in  per-^ 
plexity  and  disappointment. 

Such  are  the  few  observations  which  I  have 
noted  concerning  the  character,  disposition,  and 
manners  of  the  White  inhabitants  of  these  islands. 
I  proceed  now  to  persons  of  mixed  blood  (usual¬ 
ly  termed  people  of  colour ),  and  native  blacks  of 
free  condition.  Of  the  former,  all  the  different 
classes,  or  varieties,  are  not  easily  discriminated. 
In  the  British  West  Indies  they  are  commonly 
known  by  the  names  of  Samboes ,  Mulattoes ,  2ua- 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


**5 


droons,  and  Mestizos •*  but  the  Spaniards,  from 
whom  these  appellations  are  borrowed,  have  many 
other  and  much  nicer  distinctions,  of  which  the 
following  account  is  given  by  Don  Anthonio  de 
Ulloa,  in  his  description  of  the  inhabitants  of  Car- 
thagena : 

(t  Among  the  tribes  which  are  derived  from  an 
intermixture  of  the  whites  with  the  negroes,  the 
first  are  the  mulattoes ;  next  to  these  are  the  ter - 
cerones,  produced  from  a  white  and  a  mulatto, 
with  some  approximation  to  the  former,  but  not 
so  near  as  to  obliterate  their  origin.  After  these, 
follow  the  quarterones ,  proceeding  from  a  white 
and  a  terceron.  The  last  are  the  quinterons ,  who 
owe  their  origin  to  a  white  and  quarteron.  This  is 
the  last  gradation,  there  being  no  visible  difference 
between  them  and  the  whites,  either  in  colour  or 
features;  nay  they  are  often  fairer  than  the  Spani¬ 
ards.  The  children  of  a  white  and  quinteron  con¬ 
sider  themselves  as  free  from  all  taint  of  the  negro 
race.  Every  person  is  so  jealous  of  the  order  of 
their  tribe  or  cast,  that  if,  through  inadvertence  you 
call  them  by  a  degree  lower  than  what  they  actual- 

*  A  Sambo  is  the  offspring  of  a  black,  woman  by  a  mulatto  man,  or 
vice  versa. 

Mulatto  —  of  a  black  woman  by  a  white  man. 

Quadroon  —  of  a  mulatto  woman  by  a  white  man. 

Mestize  or  mustee  —  of  a  quadroon  woman  by  a  white  man. 

The  offspring  of  a  Mestize  by  a  white  man  are  white  by  law.  A 
mestize  therefore  in  our  islands  is,  I  suppose,  the  quinteron  of  the 
Spaniards. 


21  6 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

lyare,  they  are  highly,  offended.  Before  they  at¬ 
tain  the  class  of  the  quinterones ,  there  are  seve¬ 
ral  intervening  circumstances  which  throw  them 
back;  for  between  the  mulatto  and  the  negro,  there 
is  an  intermediate  race  which  they  call  samboes , 
owing  their  origin  to  a  mixture  between  one  of 
these  with  an  Indian,  or  among  themselves.  Be¬ 
twixt  the  tercerones  and  mulattoes,  the  quarte- 
rones  and  the  tercerones,  & c.  are  those  called 
t ente  en  el  ayre ,  suspended  in  the  air  j  because  they 
neither  advance  nor  recede.  Children  whose  pa¬ 
rents  are  a  quarteron  or  quinteron,  and  a  mulatto 
or  terceron,  are  salto  atras  retrogrades ;  because, 
instead  of  advancing  towards  being  whites,  they 
have  gone  backwards  towards  the  negro  race. 
The  children  between  a  negro  and  a  quinteron, 
are  called  sambos  de  negro,  de  mulatto,  de  terce¬ 
ron,  &  c.” 

In  Jamaica,  and  I  believe  in  the  rest  of  our 
Sugar  Islands,  the  descendants  of  negroes  by  white 
people,  entitled  by  birth  to  all  the  rights  and  liber¬ 
ties  of  white  subjects  in  the  full  extent  are  such  as 
are  above  three  steps  removed  in  lineal  digression 
from  the  negro  venter.  All  below  this,  whether 
called  in  common  parlance  mestizes,  quadroons,  or 
mulattoes,  are  deemed  by  law  mulattoes. 

Anciently  there  was  a  distinction  in  Jamaica  be¬ 
tween  such  of  these  people  as  were  bom  of  freed 
mothers  (the  maxim  of  the  civil  law  partus  sequiter 
ventrem ,  prevailing  in  all  our  colonies)  and  such  as 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  2117 

had  been  immediately  released  from  slavery  by  deed 
or  will  of  their  owners.  While  the  former  were 
allowed  a  trial  by  jury  in  criminal  cases*  the  latter 
were  tried  in  the  same  way  as  the  common  slaves* 
by  two  justices  and  three  freeholders.  Neither 
were  the  latter  admitted  as  evidences  against  free¬ 
born  persons,  until  the  year  1748,  when  an  act  was 
passed  in  their  favour,  putting  both  classes  on  the 
same  footing. 

At  the  same  time,  the  legal  capacities  which 
they  possessed,  were  very  imperfectly  defined ; 
The  mulattoes  were  allowed  no  other  privilege, 
than  the  free  negroes,  concerning  whom,  (few  of 
them  being  baptized,  or  supposed  to  be  sensible  of 
the  nature  of  an  oath),  the  courts  of  law  interpreted 
the  act  of  manumission  by  the  owner,  as  nothing 
more  than  an  abandonment,  or  release  of  his  own 
proper  authority  over  the  person  of  the  slave, 
which  did  not,  and  could  not*  convey  to  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  his  bounty,  the  civil  and  political  rights 
of  a  natural-born  subject;  and  the  same  principle 
was  applied  to  the  issue  of  freed  mothers,  until  af¬ 
ter  the  third  generation  from  the  negro  ancestor. 

The  principal  incapacities  to  which  these  people 
are  now  subject,  as  distinct  from  the  whites;  are 
these.— 

First;  In  most  of  the  British  islands,  their  evi¬ 
dence  is  not  received  in  criminal  cases  against  a 
white  person,  nor  even  against  a  person  of  colour, 
Vol.  IF 


e  e 


218  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

in  whose  favour  a  particular  act  has  been  passed  by 
the  legislature.  In  this  respect  they  seem  to  be 
placed  on  a  worse  footing  than  the  enslaved  ne¬ 
groes,  who  have  masters  that  are  interested  in  their 
protection,  and  who,  if  their  slaves  are  maltreated, 
have  a  right  to  recover  damages,  by  an  action  on 
the  case.* 

Secondly ;  They  are  denied  the  privilege  of  being 
eligible  to  serve  in  parochial  vestries  and  general 
assemblies  ;  or  of  acting  in  any  office  of  public 
trust,  even  so  low  as  that  of  a  constable;  neither 
are  they  permitted  to  hold  commissions  even  in 
the  black  and  mulatto  companies  of  militia.  They 
are  precluded  also  from  voting  at  elections  of  mem¬ 
bers  to  serve  in  the  assembly.  It  may  be  urged, 
however,  that  the  laws  of  England  require  baptism, 
and  a  certain  degree  of  property,  in  similar  cases. 

Thirdly ;  By  an  act  of  the  assembly  of  Jamaica, 
passed  in  the  year  1762,  it  is  enacted,  that  a  testa¬ 
mentary  devise  from  a  white  person  to  a  negro  or 
mulatto,  not  born  in  wedlock,  of  real  or  personal 
estate,  exceeding  in  value  £.2,000  currency,  shall 
be  void,  and  the  property  descend  to  the  heir  at 
law. 

As  some  counterbalance  however  to  these  re¬ 
strictions,  the  assembly,  on  proper  application,  is 

*  In  Jamaica  this  grievance  has  been  partly  redressed  since  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  the  former  editions. 


WEST  INDIES. 


219 


CHAP.  I.] 

readily  enough  inclined  to  pass  private  acts,  grant¬ 
ing  the  privileges  of  white  people,  with  some  li¬ 
mitations,  to  such  persons  of  colour  as  have  been 
regularly  baptized,  and  properly  educated.  On  the 
same  ground,  private  bills  are  sometimes  passed,  to 
authorize  gentlemen  of  fortune,  under  particular 
circumstances,  to  devise  their  estates  to  their  re¬ 
puted  mulatto  children,  notwithstanding  the  act 
of  1762. 

But  there  is  this  mischief  arising  from  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  rigour  ostensibly  maintained  by  the  laws 
against  this  unfortunate  race  of  people;  that  it 
tends  to  degrade  them  in  their  own  eyes,  and  in 
the  eyes  of  the  community  to  which  they  belong. 
This  is  carried  so  far,  as  to  make  them  at  once 
wretched  to  themselves,  and  useless  to  the  public. 
It  very  frequently  happens  that  the  lowest  white 
person,  considering  himself  as  greatly  superior  to 
the  richest  and  best-educated  free  man  of  colour, 
will  disdain  to  associate  with  a  person  of  the  latter 
description,  treating  him  as  the  Egyptians  treated 
the  Israelites,  with  whom  they  held  it  an  abomi¬ 
nation  to  eat  bread.  To  this  evil,  arising  from 
public  opinion,  no  partial  interposition  of  the  legis¬ 
lature  in  favour  of  individuals,  affords  an  effectual 
remedy;  and  the  consequence  is,  that  instead  of  a 
benefit,  these  unhappy  people  are  a  burthen  and 
a  reproach  to  society.  They  have  no  motives  of 
sufficient  efficacy,  either,  to  engage  them  in  the  ser¬ 
vice  of  their  country,  or  in  profitable  labour  for 
their  own  advantage.  Their  progress  in  civility 


220 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv, 

and  knowledge  is  animated  by  no  encouragement  ; 
their  attachment  is  received  without  approbation  $ 
and  their  diligence  exerted  without  reward.* 

I  am  happy,  however,  to  assert  with  truth,  that 
their  fidelity  and  loyalty  have  hitherto  remained  un¬ 
impeached  and  unsuspected.  To  the  negroes  they 
are  objects  of  envy  and  hatred  ;  for  the  same  or  a 
greater  degree  of,  superiority  which  the  whites  as¬ 
sume  over  them ,  the  free  mulattoes  lay  claim  to 
over  the  blacks.  These,  again,  abhor  the  idea  oi 
being  slaves  to  the  descendants  of  slaves.  Ihus 
circumstanced,  the  general  character  of  the  mulat¬ 
toes  is  strongly  marked  by  the  peculiarity  of  their 
situation;  and  I  cannot  but  think  that  they  are,  on 
the  whole,  objects  of  favour  and  compassion. 

*  It  would  surely  be  a  wise  and  humane  law  that  should  grant  to 
every  free  negro  and  mulatto,  the  right  of  being  a  competent  witness  in 
all  criminal  cases,  and  more  especially  in  those  of  personal  injury  to 
himself. — Perhaps,  indeed,  it  might  be  proper  to  require  of  such  persons 
the  proof  of  baptism,  and  the  ability  to  read  and  write  j  and  I  think 
that  some  useful  regulations  might  be  made  to  apportion  greater  pri¬ 
vileges  to  the  coloured  people  according  to  their  approximation  to  the 
whites  ;  a  system  which  would  not  serve  to  confound,  but  to  keep  up 
and  render  useful  those  distinctions  which  local  causes  have  created, 
and  which  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  abolish.  To  the  quadroons 
and  mestizes,  for  instance,  (who  possess  the  necessary  qualification  in 
real  property),  I  would  grant  the  right  of  voting  for  representatives  in 
the  assembly.  Such  a  privilege  would  give  them  an  interest  in  the 
community,  and  attach  them  powerfully  to  its  government.  In  favour 
of  such  persons  also,  the  act  of  1762  might  be  modified.  Whether  it 
would  be  wise  to  repeal  it  altogether,  is  a  deep  and  difficult  question. 
Men  who  are  unacquainted  with  local  manners  and  customs,  are  not 
competent  to  pronounce  an  opinion  in  this  case. 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  221 

In  their  deportment  towards  the  white  people 
they  are  humble,  submissive,  and  unassuming. 
Their  spirits  seem  to  sink  under  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  their  condition.  They  are  accused,  how¬ 
ever,  of  proving  bad  masters  when  invested  with 
power ;  and  their  conduct  towards  their  slaves  is 
said  to  be,  in  a  high  degree,  harsh  and  imperious. 

I  suspect  there  is  some  truth  in  this  representa¬ 
tion;  for  it  is  the  general  characteristic  of  human 
nature,  that  men  whose  authority  is  most  liable  to 
be  disputed,  are  the  most  jealous  of  any  infringe- 
ment  of  it,  and  the  most  vigilant  in  its  support. 

The  accusation  generally  brought  against  the  free 
people  of  colour,  is  the  incontinencv  of  their  wo¬ 
men;  of  whom,  such  as  are  young  and  have  tole¬ 
rable  persons,  are  universally  maintained  by  white 
men  of  all  ranks  and  conditions,  as  kept  mistresses. 
The  fact  is  too  notorious  to  be  concealed  or  contro¬ 
verted;  and  I  trust,  I  have  too  great  an  esteem  for 
my  fair  readers,  and  too  high  a  respect  for  myself, 
to  stand  forth  the  advocate  of  licentiousness  and 
debauchery.  Undoubtedly,  the  conduct  of  rnany 
of  the  whites  in  this  respect,  is  a  violation  of  all 
decency  and  decorum;  and  an  insult  and  injuiy  to 
society.  Let  it  not  offend  any  modest  ear,  howe¬ 
ver,  if  I  add  my  opinion,  that  the  unhappy  females 
here  spoken  of,  are  much  less  deserving  reproach 
and  reprehension  than  their  keepers.  I  say  this, 
from  considering  their  education  and  condition  in 
life;  for  such  are  the  unfortunate  circumstances  of 
their  birth,  that  not  one  in  fifty  of  them  is  taught 


222 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

to  write  or  read.  Profitable  instruction  therefore, 
from  those  who  are  capable  of  giving  it,  is  with¬ 
held  from  them ;  and  unhappily,  the  young  men  of 
their  own  complexion,  are  in  too  low  a  state  of  de¬ 
gradation,  to  think  of  matrimony.  On  the  other 
hand,  no  white  man  of  decent  appearance,  unless 
urged  by  the  temptation  of  a  considerable  fortune, 
will  condescend  to  give  his  hand  in  marriage  to  a 
mulatto !  The  very  idea  is  shocking.  Thus  exclu¬ 
ded  as  they  are  from  all  hope  of  ever  arriving  to 
the  honour  and  happiness  of  wedlock,  insensible  of 
its  beauty  and  sanctity ;  ignorant  of  all  Christian  and 
moral  obligations  j  threatened  by  poverty,  urged  by 
their  passions,  and  encouraged  by  example,  upon 
what  principle  can  we  expect  these  ill-fated  women 
to  act  otherwise  than  they  do  ? 

Neither  should  it  be  forgotten,  at  the  same  time, 
that  very  few  of  these  poor  females,  in  comparison 
of  the  whole,  are  guilty  of  that  infamous  species  of 
profligacy  and  prostitution,  which  flourishes,  with¬ 
out  principle  or  shame,  and  in  the  broad  eye  of 
day,  throughout  all  the  cities  of  Europe.  In  their 
dress  and  carriage  they  are  modest,  and  in  conver¬ 
sation  reserved;  and  they  frequently  manifest  a  fide¬ 
lity  and  attachment  towards  their  keepers,  which, 
if  it  be  not  virtue,  is  something  very  like  it.  The 
terms  and  manner  of  their  compliance  too  are  com¬ 
monly  as  decent,  though  perhaps  not  as  solemn,  as 
those  of  marriage;  and  the  agreement  they  consi¬ 
der  equally  innocent ;  giving  themselves  up  to  the 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  223 

husband  (for  so  he  is  called)  with  faith  plighted, 
with  sentiment,  and  with  affection. 

That  this  system  ought  to  be  utterly  abolished  I 
most  readily  admit.  Justice  towards  the  many 
beautiful  and  virtuous  young  ladies  resident  in 
these  islands,  cries  aloud  for  a  thorough  reforma¬ 
tion  of  manners :  But  by  whom  is  such  a  reform  to 
be  begun  and  accomplished?  It  can  hardly  be  ex¬ 
pected,  I  think,  from  the  objects  of  our  present 
inquiries,  who  are  conscious  of  no  vices  which 
their  Christian  instructors  have  not  taught  them; 
and  whose  good  qualities  (few  and  limited  as  they 
are)  flow  chiefly  from  their  own  native  original  cha¬ 
racter  and  disposition. 

Of  those  qualities,  the  most  striking  is  tender¬ 
ness  of  heart;  a  softness  or  sympathy  of  mind  to¬ 
wards  affliction  and  distress,  which  I  conceive  is 
seldom  displayed  in  either  extreme  of  prosperity 
or  wretchedness.  Those  who  have  never  experi¬ 
enced  any  of  the  vicissitudes  and  calamities  of  life, 
turn  averse  from  the  contemplation  of  them;  and 
those  again  who  are  wretched  themselves,  have  no 
leisure  to  attend  to  the  sufferings  of  others:  but 
the  benevolence  of  the  poor  people  of  whom  I 
treat,  is  not  merely  solitary  and  contemplative;  it 
is  an  active  principle,  in  which  they  may  be  said 
particularly  to  excel;  and  I  have  the  authority  of  a 
great  writer  before  quoted  (Don  Anthonio  De 
TJlloa)  to  support  me  in  this  representation.  Speak- 


*224 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

ing  of  their  kindness  to  many  poor  Europeans,  who 
in  the  hopes  of  mending  their  fortunes  repair  to 
the  Spanish  West  Indies,  where  they  are  utterly 
unknown  he  has  the  following  account  of  such  of 
them  as  are  called  at  Carthagena  Pulizones ;  being, 
he  says,  men  without  employment,  stock,  or  re¬ 
commendation.  “  Many  of  these,  (he  observes),  af¬ 
ter  traversing  the  streets  until  they  have  nothing 
left  to  procure  them  lodging  or  food,  are  reduced 
to  have  recourse  to  the  last  extremity,  the  Francis¬ 
can  hospital;  where  they  receive,  in  a  quantity 
barely  sufficient  to  preserve  life,  a  kind  of  pap 
made  of  cassada,  of  which  the  natives  themselves 
will  not  eat.  This  is  their  food;  their  lodging  is 
the  porticoes  of  the  squares  and  churches,  until 
their  good  fortune  throws  them  in  the  way  of  some 
trader  going  up  the  country,  who  wants  a  servant. 
The  city  merchants,  standing  in  no  need  of  them, 
discountenance  these  adventurers.  Affected  by  the 
difference  of  the  climate,  aggravated  by  bad  food, 
dejected  and  tortured  by  the  entire  disappointment 
of  their  romantic  hopes,  they  fall  sick;  without  any 
other  succour  to  apply  to,  than  Divine  Providence, 
Now  it  is  that  the  charity  of  the  people  of  co¬ 
lour  becomes  conspicuous.  The  negro  and  mulatto 
free  women,  moved  at  the  deplorable  condition  of 
these  poor  wretches,  carry  them  to  their  houses, 
and  nurse  them  with  the  greatest  care  and  affection. 
If  any  one  die,  they  bury  him  by  the  alms  they 
procure,  and  even  cause  masses  to  be  said  for  his 
soul.” 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  I.] 


2  '25 


I  believe  that  no  man,  who  is  acquainted  with 
the  general  conduct  and  disposition  of  the  same 
class  of  people  in  our  own  islands,  will  doubt  that 
they  would  act  as  benevolently  and  humanely,  un¬ 
der  similar  circumstances,  as  those  of  Carthagena. 
Their  tenderness,  as  nurses,  towards  the  sick; 
their  disinterested  gratitude  and  attachment  where 
favours  are  shewn  them;  and  their  peaceable  de¬ 
portment  under  a  rigourous  system  of  laws,  and  the 
influence  of  manners  still  more  oppressive,  afford 
great  room  to  lament,  that  a  more  enlightened  and 
liberal  policy  is  not  adopted  towards  them.  The 
enfranchisement  of  such  as  are  enslaved,  Christian 
instruction  to  the  whole,  and  encouragement  to 
their  industry,  would,  in  time,  make  them  a  use¬ 
ful  and  valuable  class  of  citizens;  induce  them  to 
intermarry  with  each  other,  and  render  their  pre¬ 
sent  relaxed  and  vicious  system  of  life,  as  odious  in 
appearance  as  it  is  baneful  to  society.* 


*  The  Rev.  Mr.  Ramsay  has  enlarged  on  the  same  idea  concern¬ 
ing  these  unfortunate  people.  tc  Children  of  mulatto  women,  he  ob- 
“  serves  (meaning,  I  presume,  their  children  by  white  men)  should 
“  he  declared  free  from  their  birth.  Intendants  should  be  appointed 
“  to  see  them  placed  out  in  time  to  such  trade  or  business  as  may  best 
“  agree  with  their  inclination  and  the  demands  of  the  colony:  this 
“  should  be  done  at  the  expense  of  their  fathers,  and  a  sufficient  sum 
<l  might  be  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the  church-wardens,  soon,  after 
“their  birth,  to  answer  the  purpose;  the  intendant  keeping  the 
“  church-wardens  to  their  duty.  By  these  means  the  number  of  free 
“  citizens  would  insensibly  increase  in  the  colonies,  and  add  to  their 
“  security  and  strength.  A  new  rank  of  citizens,  placed  between. 
“  the  black  and  white  races,  would  be  established.  They  would  na- 
*(  turaily  attach  themselves  to  the  white  race  as  the  most  honourable 

Voi.  ir.  f  f 


226  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

Hitherto  I  have  confined  myself  to  those  people 
who,  having  some  portion  of  Christian  blood  in 
their  veins,  pride  themselves  on  that  circumstance, 
and  to  the  conscious  value  of  which,  it  is  probable, 
that  some  part  of  what  is  commendable  in  their 
conduct  is  owing.  The  free  blacks,  not  having  the 
same  advantage,  have  not  the  same  emulation  to 
excel.  In  truth,  they  differ  but  little  from  their 
brethren  in  bonds,  whose  manners,  genius,  and 
character,  will  be  the  subject  of  my  next  inquiries. 
I  shall  therefore  conclude  the  present  chapter  by 
presenting  to  my  readers,  a  performance  of  a  de¬ 
ceased  friend,  in  which  the  character  of  the  sable 
and  saffron  beauties  of  the  West  Indies,  and  the 
folly  of  their  paramours,  are  pourtrayed  with  the 
delicacy  and  dexterity  of  wit,  and  the  fancy  and 
elegance  of  genuine  poetry. 

“  relation,  and  so  become  a  barrier  against  the  designs  of  the  blacks, 
“  Sec."  All  this,  however,  is  easily  proposed  in  theory,  but  lam 
afraid,  more  difficult  to  adopt  in  practice  than  Mr.  Ramsay  was 
aware  of. 


CHAP.  I.] 


WEST  INDIES. 


227. 


THE  SABLE  VENUS > 

AN  ODE. 


(Written  in  Jamaica.) 


Alba  ligustra  cadunt  vaccinia  nigra  leguntur. 


I  LONG  had  my  gay  lyre  forsook. 
But  strung  it  t’other  day,  and  took 
T’ wards  Helicon  my  way; 

The  muses  all,  th’  assembly  grac’d. 
The  president  himself  was  plac’d. 

By  chance  ’twa's  concert-day. 


Erato  smil’d  to  see  me  come; 
Ask’d  why  I  staid  so  much  at  home ; 

I  own’d  my  conduct  wrong; — 
But  now,  the  sable  queen  of  love. 
Resolv’d  my  gratitude  to  prove. 

Had  sent  me  for  a  song. 


VlRGo 


228  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book 

The  ladies  look’d  extremely  shy, 

Apollo’s  smile  was  arch  and  sly. 

But  not  one  word  they  said: 

I  gaz’d, — sure,  silence  is  consent, — 

I  made  my  bow,  away  I  went ; 

Was  not  my  duty  paid? 


Come  to  my  bosom,  genial  fire. 

Soft  sounds,  and  lively  thoughts  inspire  3 
Unusual  is  my  theme  3 
Not  such  dissolving  Ovid  sung, 

Nor  melting  Sappho’s  glowing  tongue, — 
More  dainty  mine  I  deem. 


Sweet  is  the  beam  of  morning  bright. 
Yet  sweet  the  sober  shade  of  night; 

On  rich  Angola’s  shores, 
While  beauty  clad  in  sable  dye. 
Enchanting  fires  the  wond’ring  eye. 
Farewell  ye  Paphian  bow’rs. 


O  sable  queen !  thy  mild  domain 
I  seek,  and  court  thy  gentle  reign. 

So  soothing,  soft,  and  sweet; 
Where  melting  love,  sincere  delight. 
Fond  pleasure,  ready  joys  invite. 
And  unbought  raptures  meet. 


IV. 


WEST  INDIES. 


229 


CHAP.  I.] 

The  prating  Frank,  the  Spaniard  proud. 
The  double  Scot,  FI  IBEBNIAN  loud, 

And  sullen  English  own 
The  pleasing  softness  of  thy  sway. 

And  here,  transferr’d  allegiance  pay. 

For  gracious  is  thy  throne. 


From  East  to  West,  o’er  either  Ind’ 
Thy  scepter  sways ;  thy  power  we  find 
By  both  the  Tropieks  felt; 

The  blazing  Sun  that  gilds  the  Zone, 
Waits  but  the  triumph  of  thy  throne, 
Quite  round  the  burning  Belt. 


When  thou  this  large  domain  to  view, 
Jamaica’s  isle,  thy  conquest  new. 

First  left  thy  native  shore. 

Bright  was  the  morn,  and  soft  the  breeze. 
With  wanton  joy  the  curling  seas 
The  beauteous  burthen  bore. 


Of  iv’ry  was  the  car,  inlaid 
With  every  shell  of  lively  shade ; 

The  throne  was  burnish’d  gold: 

The  footstool,  gay  with  coral,  beam’d. 
The  wheels  with  brightest  amber  gleam’d. 
And  glist’ring  round  they  roll’d. 


230 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book. 

The  peacock  and  the  ostrich  spread 
Their  beauteous  plumes,  a  trembling  shade. 
From  noon-day’s  sultry  flame  : 

Sent  by  their  sire  the  careful  East 
The  wanton  breezes  fann’d  her  breast. 

And  flutter’d  round  the  dame. 


The  winged  fish,  in  purple  trace. 

The  chariot  drew  ;  with  easy  grace 
Their  azure  rein  she  guides  : 

And  now  they  fly,  and  now  they  swim  ; 
Now  o’er  the  wave  they  lightly  skim. 

Or  dart  beneath  the  tides. 


Each  bird  that  haunts  the  rock  and  bay. 
Each  scaly  native  of  the  sea. 

Came  crowding  o’er  the  main; 

The  dolphin  shews  his  thousand  dyes. 
The  grampus  his  enormous  size. 

And  gambol  in  her  train. 


Her  skin  excell’d  the  raven  plume. 

Her  breath  the  fragrant  orange  bloom. 
Her  eye  the  tropick  beam: 

Soft  was  her  lip  as  silken  down. 

And  mild  her  look  as  ev’ning  sun 
That  gilds  the  Cob  re*  stream. 


IV. 


*  A  river  so  called  in  Jamaica. 


chap,  i.]  WEST  INDIES.  23 1 

The  loveliest  limbs  her  form  compose. 

Such  as  her  sister  Venus  chose 

In  Florence,  where  she’s  seen; 

Both  just  alike,  except  the  white. 

No  difference,  no — none  at  night. 

The  beauteous  dames  between. 


With  native  ease  serene  she  sat. 
In  elegance  of  charms  compleat. 
And  ev’ry  heart  she  won  : 
False  dress  deformity  may  shade, 
True  beauty  courts  no  foreign  aid  : 
Can  tapers  light  the  sun? — 


The  Pow’r  that  rules  old  ocean  wide, 
’Twas  he,  they  say,  had  calm’d  the  tide. 
Beheld  the  chariot  roll : 

Assum’d  the  figure  of  a  tar. 

The  captain  of  a  man  of  war. 

And  told  her  all  his  soul. 


She  smil’d  with  kind  consenting  eyes; — 
Beauty  was  ever  valour’s  prize; 

He  rais’d  a  murky  cloud : 

The  tritons  sound,  the  sirens  sing, 

The  dolphins  dance,  the  billows  ring. 

And  joy  fills  all  the  crowd. 


232  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  iv 

Blest  offspring  of  the  warm  embrace ! 

Fond  ruler  of  the  crisped  race  ! 

Tho’  strong  thy  bow  dear  boy. 

Thy  mingled  shafts  of  black  and  white, 

Are  wing’d  with  feathers  of  delight. 

Their  points  are  tipt  with  joy. 


But  when  her  step  had  touch’d  the  strand. 
Wild  rapture  seiz’d  the  ravish’d  land. 

From  every  part  they  came: 

Each  mountain,  valley,  plain  and  grove 
Haste  eagerly  to  shew  their  love  ; 

Right  welcome  was  the  dame. 


Port-Royal  shouts  were  heard  aloud. 
Gay  St.  I  ago  sent  a  crowd. 

Grave  Kingston  not  a  few: 

No  rabble  rout, — I  heard  it  said, 

Some  great  ones  join’d  the  cavalcade—- 
The  muse  will  say  not  who. 


Gay  Goddess  of  the  sable  smile ! 
Propitious  still,  this  grateful  isle 
With  thy  protection  bless  ! 

Here  fix  secure  thy  constant  thrones 
Where  all  adoring  thee,  do  one. 
One  Deity  confess. 


« 


I 


CHAP.  I,]  WEST  INDIES. 

For  me,  if  I  no  longer  own 
Allegiance  to  the  Cyprian  throne, 
I  play  no  fickle  part ; 

It  were  ingratitude  to  slight 
Superior  kindness;  I  delight 
To  feel  a  grateful  heart. 


Then,  playful  Goddess  1  cease  to  change, 
Nor  in  new  beauties  vainly  range; 

Tho’  whatsoe’er  thy  view. 

Try  ev’ry  form  thou  canst  put  on. 

I’ll  follow  thee  thro’  ev’ry  one ; 

So  staunch  am  I,  so  true. 


Do  thou  in  gentle  Phi  bi  a  smile. 

In  artful  Ben  nee  a  beguile. 

In  wanton  Mi  mb  a  pout; 

In  sprightly  Cuba’s  eyes  look  gay. 
Or  grave  in  sober  Quashes  a, 

I  still  shall  find  thee  out. 


Thus  have  I  sung;  perhaps  too  gay 
Such  subject  for  such  time  of  day. 

And  fitter  far  for  youth: 

Should  then  the  song  too  wanton  seem, 
You  know  who  chose  th’  unlucky  theme. 
Dear  Bryan  tell  the  truth. 


•233 


Vol.  II. 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 


235 


CHAPTER  II. 


Of  negroes  in  ct  state  of  slavery . — Preliminary  observa¬ 
tions. — Origin  of  the  slave  trade. — Portuguese  settle¬ 
ments  on  ike  African  coast. — Negroes  introduced  into 
Hispaniola  in  1502,  and  the  slave  trade  revived  at  the 
instance  of  Barth,  de  las  Cassas ,  in  1517. — Hawkins’’ s 
voyages  to  the  coast,  in  1562  and  1563. — African  Com¬ 
pany  established  by  James  I. — Second  charter  in  1631 
by  Charles  I. — Third  charter  in  1662.- — Fourth  char¬ 
ter  in  1672. — Effect  of  the  Petition  and  Declaration  of 
Rights  in  1688. — Acts  of  the  9th  and  10 th  of  William 
and  Mary,  c.  26. — New  regulations  in  1750. — Descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  African  coast. — Forts  and  factories. — Ex¬ 
ports  from  Great  Britain. — Number  of  negroes  trans¬ 
ported  annually  to  the  British  colonies. — State  of  the 
trade  from  1771  to  1787. — Number  of  negroes  at  this 
time  exported  annually  by  the  different  ■nations  of 
Europe. 

rT'^HE  progress  of  my  work  has  now  brought  me 
JL  to  the  contemplation  of  human  nature  in  its 
most  debased  and  abject  state; — to  the  sad  pros¬ 
pect  of  450,000  reasonable  beings  (in  the  English 
islands  only)  in  a  state  of  barbarity  and  slavery;  o 


236  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv, 

■whom — I  will  not  say  the  major  part,  but — great 
numbers  assuredly,  have  been  torn  from  their  na¬ 
tive  country  and  dearest  connections,  by  means 
on  which  no  good  mind  can  reflect  but  with  sen¬ 
timents  of  disgust,  commiseration,  and  sorrow7 ! 

I  am  not  unapprized  of  the  danger  I  incur  at 
this  juncture,*  in  treating  on  the  subject  of  African 
slavery,  and  the  stave  trade.  By  endeavouring  to 
remove  those  wild  and  ill  founded  notions  which 
have  been  long  encouraged  by  misinformed  writers 
in  Great  Britain,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  British  Sugar  Islands,  I  am  conscious,  that 
I  shall  be  exposed  to  all  that  bitterness  and 
wrath,  and  anger  and  clamour,  and  evil-speaking 
and  malice,”  with  which  it  has  long  been  popular 
to  load  the  unfortunate  slave-holder:  yet  nothing  is 
more  certain  than  that  the  slave  trade  may  be  very 
wicked,  and  the  planters  in  general  very  innocent. 
By  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  present  inhabitants 
of  the  British  West  Indies  came  into  possession  of 
their  plantations  by  inheritance  or  accident.  Many 
persons  there  are,  in  Great  Britain  itself,  who, 
amidst  the  continual  fluctuation  of  human  affairs, 
and  the  changes  incident  to  property,  find  them¬ 
selves  possessed  of  estates  in  the  West  Indies, 
which  they  have  never  seen,  and  invested  with 
powers  over  their  fellow  creatures  there,  which, 
however  extensively  odious,  they  have  never  abu~ 

*  Alluding  to  the  petitions  depending  in  parliament  (1791)  for  an 
abolition  of  the  Slave  trade. 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  237 

sed ;  some  of  these  gentlemen,  unacquainted  with 
local  circumstances,  and  misled  by  the  popular 
outcry,  humanely  gave  orders  to  emancipate  all 
their  slaves,  at  whatever  expense ;  but  are  since 
convinced,  that  their  benevolent  purposes  cannot  be 
carried  into  effect,  consistently,  even  with  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  the  negroes  themselves. — The  Reverend 
Society  established  in  Great  Britain  for  propagating 
the  Gospel  in  foreign  parts,  are  themselves  under 
this  very  predicament.  That  venerable  body  hold 
a  plantation  in  Barbadoes  under  a  devise  of  colonel 
Codrington ;  and  they  have  found  themselves,  not 
only  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  support¬ 
ing  the  system  of  slavery  which  was  bequeathed  to 
them  with  the  land,  but  are  induced  also,  from  the 
purest  and  best  motives,  to  purchase  occasionally  a 
certain  number  of  negroes,  in  order  to  divide  the 
work,  and  keep  up  the  stock.  They  well  know 
that  moderate  labour,  unaccompanied  with  that 
wretched  anxiety  to  which  the  poor  of  England  are 
subject  in  making  provision  for  the  day  that  is  pas¬ 
sing  over  them,  is  a  state  of  comparative  felicity : 
and  they  know  also,  that  men  in  savage  life  have 
no  incentive  to  emulation :  persuasion  is  lost  on 
such  men,  and  compulsion  to  a  certain  degree,  is 
humanity  and  charity. 

The  question  then,  and  the  only  question  where¬ 
in  the  character  of  the  planters  is  concerned,  is  this : 
— Making  due  allowance  for  human  frailty  under 
the  influence  of  a  degree  of  power  ever  danger- 


23B  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

ous  to  virtue,  is  their  general  conduct  towards 
their  slaves  such  only  as  necessarily  results  from 
their  situation?  If  to  this  inquiry,  an  affirmative  be 
returned,  surely,  Christian  charity,  though  it  may 
lament  and  condemn  the  first  establishment  of  a 
system  of  slavery  among  them,  and  the  means  by 
which  it  is  still  kept  up  and  supported,  will  not 
hastily  arraign  those  who  neither  introduced,  nor,  as 
I  shall  hereafter  shew,  have  been  wanting  in  their 
best  endeavours  to  correct  and  remedy  many  of  the 
evils  of  it. 

Having  premised  thus  much,  I  shall  now  pro¬ 
ceed  to  lay  before  my  readers  some  account  of  the 
origin  and  present  state  of  the  slave  trade,  between 
the  nations  of  Africa  and  such  of  the  states  of  Eu- 
i‘ope  as  are  concerned  in  it:  this  will  constitute 
what  remains  of  the  present  chapter.  In  the  next 
I  shall  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  negro  charac¬ 
ter  and  disposition:  after  which  I  shall  treat;  first, 
of  the  means  by  which  slaves  are  procured  in 
Africa;  secondly,  of  the  mode  of  conveying  them 
to  the  West  Indies ;  and  thirdly,  of  their  general 
treatment  and  situation  when  sold  to  the  planters 
there:  an  arrangement  which  will  afford  opportuni¬ 
ties  of  illustrating  the  foregoing  observations,  by 
enabling  me  to  intersperse  such  reflections  as  occur 
to  my  mind,  on  the  several  petitions  now  depending 
in  parliament  for  a  total  abolition  of  the  slave  trade, 
all,  or  the  greatest  part  of  which,  are  grounded  on 
abuses  charged  to  exist  under  those  several  heads. 


I 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  239 

In  the  year  1442,  while  the  Portuguese,  under 
the  encouragement  of  their  celebrated  prince  Hen¬ 
ry,  were  exploring  the  coast  of  Africa,  Anthony 
Gonsalez,  who  two  years  before  had  seized  some 
Moors  near  Cape  Bojador,  was,  by  that  prince,  or¬ 
dered  to  carry  his  prisoners  back  to  Africa :  he 
landed  them  at  Bio  del-Oro ,  and  received  from  the 
Moors  in  exchange,  ten  blacks,  and  a  quantity  of 
gold  dust,  with  which  he  returned  to  Lisbon. 

The  success  of  Gonsalez,  not  only  awakened  the 
admiration,  but  stimulated  the  avarice  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen  ;  who,  in  the  course  of  a  few  succeeding 
years,  fitted  out  no  less  than  thirty-seven  ships  in 
pursuit  of  the  same  gainful  traffic.  In  1481  the 
Portuguese  built  a  fort  on  the  Gold  coast  3  ano¬ 
ther,  sometime  afterwards,  on  the  island  of  Argu- 
in ;  and  a  third  at  Loan  go  Saint  Paul’s,  on  the  coast 
of  Angola;  and  the  king  of  Portugal  took  the  title 
of  lord  of  Guinea. 

So  early  as  the  year  1502,  the  Spaniards  began 
to  employ  a  few  negroes  in  the  mines  of  Hispani¬ 
ola;  but,  in  the  year  following,  Ovando,  the  go¬ 
vernor  of  that  island,  forbad  the  further  importa¬ 
tion  of  them ;  alleging,  that  they  taught  the  In¬ 
dians  all  manner  of  wickedness,  and  rendered  them 
less  tractible  than  formerly.*  So  dreadfully  rapid, 
however,  was  the  decrease  of  these  last-mentioned 
unfortunate  people,  as  to  induce  the  court  of  Spain, 


*  Herrera,  decad.  I.  lib.  5.  c.12. 


240 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iV. 

a  few  years  afterwards,  to  revoke  the  orders  issued 
by  Ovando,  and  to  authorize,  by  royal  authority, 
the  introduction  of  African  slaves  from  the  Portu¬ 
guese  settlements  on  the  coast  of  Guinea.  In  the 
year  1517,  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  granted  a  pa¬ 
tent  to  certain  persons  for  the  exclusive  supply  of 
4,000  negroes  annually,  to  the  islands  of  Hispani¬ 
ola,  Cuba,  Jamaica,  and  Puerto  Rico  A  This  pa¬ 
tent  having  been  assigned  to  some  Genoese  mer¬ 
chants,  the  supply  of  negroes  to  the  Spanish 
American  plantations  became  from  that  time  an 
established  and  regular  branch  of  commerce. 

The  concurrence  of  the  Emperor  in  this  mea¬ 
sure  was  obtained  at  the  solicitation  of  Bartholo¬ 
mew  de  las  Cassas,  bishop  of  Chiapa,  the  cele¬ 
brated  protector  and  advocate  of  the  Indians;  and 
the  conduct  of  this  great  prelate,  on  that  occasion, 
has  been  the  subject  of  much  censure  and  animad¬ 
version.  He  is  charged  with  the  iniquitous  ab¬ 
surdity  of  reducing  one  race  of  men  to  slavery 
while  he  was  concerting  the  means  of  restoring 
freedom  to  another.  “  While  he  contended,”  says 
a  late  writer, f  “  for  the  liberty  of  the  people  born 
in  one  quarter  of  the  globe,  he  laboured  to  enslave 
the  inhabitants  of  another  region ;  and  in  warmth 
of  his  zeal  to  save  the  Americans  from  the  yoke, 
pronounced  it  to  be  lawful  and  expedient  to  im¬ 
pose  one,  still  heavier ,  upon  the  Africans.”  It 


*  Herrera,  decad.  2.  lib.  2.  c.  20. 
f  Robertson,  Hist.  Amer. 


2  41 


map.  n.]  West  indies. 

would  be  difficult,  perhaps,  to  say  what  yoke  could 
Well  be  heavier  than  the  rigorous  one  imposed  by 
the  Spaniards  on  the  wretched  Indians ;  under 
which,  as  the  same  Historian  elsewhere  relates, 
the  natives  of  Hispaniola  “were  educed,  in  the 
short  space  of  fifteen  years,  from  at  least  a  million 
to  sixty  thousand.”  But  the  conduct  of  Las  Casas 
is  not  fully  and  fairly  stated  in  the  foregoing  repre¬ 
sentation  3  for  it  supposes,  that  each  class  of  people 
(the  negroes  and  Indians)  was  found  in  a  similar 
condition  and  situation  of  life,  whereas  it  is  noh> 
rious,  that  many  of  the  negroes  imported  from 
Africa,  are  born  of  enslaved  parents,  are  bred  up 
as  slaves  themselves,  and  as  such  have  been  habitu¬ 
ated  to  labour  from  their  infancy.  On  this  account 
we  are  told,  that  one  able  negro  was  capable  of 
performing  the  work  of  four  Indians.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  condition  of  these  last-mentioned 
people  was  widely  removed  from  a  state  of  slavery. 
“  The  inhabitants  of  these  islands,”  says  a  cotem- 
porary  writer,  “  have  been  so  used  to  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  liberty,  in  a  life  of  plenty  and  pastime, 
that  the  yoke  of  servitude  is  insupportable  to  them  3 
and  assuredly,  if  they  would  but  embrace  our  holy 
religion,  they  would  be  the  happiest  of  human 
beings  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  ancient  free¬ 
dom.”*  Las  Casas  therefore  contended  reasonably 
enough,  that  men  inured  to  servitude  and  drudge¬ 
ry,  who  could  experience  no  alteration  of  circum¬ 
stances  from  a  change  of  masters,  and  who  felt  not 

*  Pet.  Martyr,  decatl. 

Voi.  ir.  H  h 


242  HISTORY  OF  THE  [boor  m 

the  sentiments  which  freedom  alone  can  inspire, 
were  not  so  great  objects  of  commiseration,  as 
those  who,  having  always  enjoyed  the  sweets  of 
unbounded  liberty,  were  suddenly  deprived  of  it, 
and  urged  to  tasks  of  labour  which  their  strength 
was  unable  to  perform.  Las  Casas  could  neither 
prevent,  nor  foresee,  the  abuses  and  evils  that- have 
arisen  from  the  system  of  traffic  recommended  by 
him,  and  is  not  therefore  justly  chargeable  with- 
the  rashness,  absurdity,  and  iniquity,  which  have 
since  been  imputed  to  his  conduct. 

Of  the  English,  the  first  who  is  known  to  have 
been  concerned  in  this  commerce,  was  the  celebra¬ 
ted  John  Hawkins j  who  afterwards  received  from 
queen  Elizabeth  the  honour  of  knighthood,  and 
was  made  treasurer  of  the  navy.  His  adventures 
are  recorded  by  Hakluyt,  a  cotemporary  historian. 
Having  made  several  voyages  to  the  Canary  islands, 
and  there  received  information  (says  Hakluyt)  Cf  that 
“  negroes  were  very  good  merchandise  in  Hispani- 
“  ola,  and  that  store  of  negroes  might  easily  be  had 
£c  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  he  resolved  to  make 
£f  trial  thereof,  and  communicated  that  device, 
“  with  his  worshipful  friends  of  London,  Sir  Lionel 
te  Ducket,  Sir  Thomas  Lodge,  Master  Gunson  (his 
<c  father-in-law),  Sir  William  Winter,  Master  Brom- 
“  field,  and  others ;  all  which  persons  liked  so  well 
“  of  his  intention,  that  they  became  liberal  contri- 
“  butors  and  adventurers  in  the  action ;  for  which 
“  purpose  there  were  three  good  ships  immediately 

provided,  the  Salomon  of  120  tunne,  wherein 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  243 

<c  Master  Hawkins  himself  went  as  general;  the 
“  Swallow,  of  100  tunnes,  and  the  Jonas,  a  bark 
“  of  40  tunnes;  in  which  small  fleete.  Master 
?e  Hawkins  took  with  him  100  men.” 

Eiawkins  sailed  from  England  for  Sierra  Leona, 
in  the  month  of  October  1562,  and  in  a  short  time 
after  his  arrival  on  the  coast,  got  into  his  possession, 
partly  (says  Hakluyt)  by  the  sword,  and  partly  by 
other  means,  to  the  number  of  300  negroes,  be¬ 
sides  other  merchandise,  with  which  he  proceeded 
directly  for  Hispaniola,  and  touching  at  different 
ports  in  that  island,  disposed  of  the  whole  of  his 
cargo  in  exchange  for  hides,  ginger,  sugar,  and 
some  pearls;  and  arrived  in  England  in  Septem¬ 
ber  1563,  after  a  very  prosperous  voyage,  which 
brought  great  profit  to  the  adventurers. 

The  success  which  had  attended  this  first  expe¬ 
dition,  appears  to  have  attracted  the  notice,  and 
excited  the  avarice  of  the  British  government;  for 
we  find  Hawkins,  in  the  year  following,  appointed 
to  the  command  of  one  of  the  queen’s  ships,  the 
Jesus  of  700  tons,  and  with  the  Solomon,  the  Ti¬ 
ger,  a  bark  of  50  tons,  and  the  Swallow,  a  bark  of 
30  tons,  sent  a  second  time  on  the  same  trading 
expedition;  but  with  what  part  of  the  profits  for 
his  own  share,  is  not  mentioned.  He  sailed  from 
Plymouth,  the  18th  of  October  1564,  and  the 
same  day  joined  at  sea  the  Minion,  another  of  the 
-queen’s  ships,  commanded  by  captain  David  Carlet, 


244  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

and  which  with  two  others,  the  John  Baptist  and 
the  Merlin,  were  likewise  bound  for  Guinea. 

The  history  of  this  voyage  is  related  at  large  in 
Hakluyt’s  collection,  by  a  person  who  embarked 
with  Hawkins  3  from  whose  account  it  appears, 
that  the  fleet  was  dispersed  by  a  violent  gale  of 
wind,  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay ;  that  the  Merlin  caught 
fire  and  blew  up;  that  the  John  Baptist  put  back, 
but  that  all  the  other  vessels  arrived  at  length  at 
Cape  Verde,  on  the  coast  of  Africa.  “  The  peo- 
pie  of  Cape  Verde,”  says  the  writer,  <e  are  called 
“  Leophares ,  and  are  counted  the  goodliest  men  of 
<c  all  others  saving  the  Congoes,  who  inhabit  this 
“  side  the  Cape  de  Buena  Esperance.  These  Le- 
tc  ophares  have  wars  against  the  JalofFs,  which  are 
“  borderers  by  them.  These  men  are  also  more 
<c  civil  than  any  other,  because  of  their  daily  traf- 
ficke  with  the  Frenchmen,  and  are  of  a  nature 
<c  very  gentle  and  loving.  Here  we  stayed  but  one 
<c  night,  and  part  of  the  day,  for  the  7th  of  Decern- 
<c  ber  we  came  away;  in  that  intending  to  have  ta- 
“  ken  negroes  there  perforce;  the  Minion’s  men 
gave  them,  to  understand  of  our  coming,  and  our 
ec  pretence ;  wherefore  they  did  avoyde  the  snares 
<c  we  had  laid  for  them.” 

It  seems  probable  from  this  account,  that  the 
captain  of  the  Minion  having  an  independent  com¬ 
mand,  was  jealous  of  Hawkins’s  authority,  or,  it  is 
rather  to  be  hoped,  was  shocked  at  the  excesses  to 
which  his  avarice  urged  him,  in  laying  snares  to, 


©hap.  n.]  WEST  INDIES.  245 

seize  and  carry  off  the  unoffending  natives.  After 
this,  the  Minion  no  longer  acted  in  concert,  nor 
sailed  in  company  with  Hawkins  and  his  squadron. 

On  the  8th  of  December,  Hawkins  anchored  at 
a  small  island  called  Alcatrasa.  At  this  place,  we 
are  informed,  that  the  Jesus  and  Solomon  riding  at 
anchor,  the  two  barks  with  their  boats  went  to  an 
island  belonging  to  a  people  called  the  Sapies ,  to 
see  if  they  could  take  any  of  the  inhabitants.  The 
English  landed,  to  the  number  of  eighty,  with 
arms  and  ammunition;  but  the  natives  flying  into 
the  woods,  they  returned  without  success.  A  short 
time  afterwards,  we  find  this  righteous  commander 
at  one  of  the  islands  which  are  called  Sambula. 
ce  In  this  island  (says  the  writer)  we  staid  certain 
“  dayes,  going  every  day  on  shore  to  take  the  in- 

habitants  with  burning  and  spoiling  their  towns. 
“  These  inhabitants  (who  were  called  Samboes) 
“  hold  divers  of  the  Sapies,  taken  in  war,  as  their 
<£  slaves,  whom  they  kept  to  till  the  ground,  of 
<c  whom  we  took  many  in  that  place,  but  of  the 
u  Samboes  none  at  all ;  for  they  fled  into  the 
“  maine.”  The  writer  then  proceeds  to  give  an 
account  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  these  peo¬ 
ple;  and  relates,  among  other  particulars,  that  sla¬ 
very  is  the  established  punishment  for  theft.  “  If 
“  a  man  (says  he)  steals  but  a  Portugal  cloth  from 
4f  another,  he  is  sold  to  the  Portugals  for  a  slave.” 
He  relates  further,  that  the  Samboes,  in  a  time  of 
scarcity,  devoured  their  captives,  for  want  of  better 
food. 


246  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

The  rest  of  Hawkins’s  adventures  are  nothing  to 
my  present  purpose.  What  has  been  quoted,  i& 
sufficient  to  demonstrate,  that  a  regular  traffic  had 
been  established  so  early  as  the  year  1564,  both 
by  the  Portuguese  and  the  French,  with  some  na¬ 
tions  of  Africa,  for  the  purchase  of  slaves;  that 
•this  intercourse  was  founded  on  mutual  contract, 
and  tended  to  civilize  the  natives  on  the  coast; 
Some  nations  of  whom  were  possessed  of  slaves, 
which  they  kept  for  the  purposes  of  agriculture; 
and  occasionally  killed  for  food;  a  horrid  practice, 
that,  I  believe,  no  longer  exists  in  this  part  of 
Africa.  In  regard  to  Hawkins  himself,  he  was,  I 
admit,  a  murderer  and  a  robber.  His  avowed  pur¬ 
pose  in  sailing  to  Guinea,  was  to  seize  by  strata¬ 
gem,  or  force,  and  carry  away  the  unsuspecting  na¬ 
tives,  in  the  view  of  selling  them  as  slaves  to  the 
people  of  Hispaniola.  In  this  pursuit,  his  object 
was  present  profit,  and  his  employment  and  pastime 
devastation  and  murder.  He  made  a  third  voyage 
to  Africa  in  1563,  for  the  same  purpose,  with  a 
squadron  of  six  ships,  which  the  reader  will  not  be 
sorry  to  find  terminated  most  miserably;  and  put  a 
stop,  for  some  years,  to  any  more  piratical  expedi¬ 
tions  of  the  English  to  the  coast  of  Africa. 

The  first  notice  which  I  find  in  history  of  an  ac¬ 
tual  attempt  by  the  British  nation  to  establish  a  re¬ 
gular  trade  on  the  African  coast,  is  in  the  year 
1618,  when  king  James  I.  granted  an  exclusive 
charter  to  Sir  Robert  Rich,  and  some  other  mer¬ 
chants  of  London,  for  raising  a  joint  stock  for  a 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  IJ.] 


247- 


trade  to  Guinea:  ships  were  accordingly  fitted  out; 
but  the  profits  not  being  found  to  answer  expecta¬ 
tion,  the  proprietors  soon  afterwards  withdrew  their 
contributions ;  and  the  charter  was  suffered  to  ex¬ 
pire.* 

In  1631,  king  Charles  I.  erected,  by  charter,  a  se¬ 
cond  company  for  a  trade  to  Africa;  granting  to  Sir 
Richard  Young,  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  and  sundry 
merchants,  to  enjoy  the  sole  trade  to  the  coast  of 
Guinea,  between  Cape  Blanco  and  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  together  with  the  isles  adjacent,  for 
thirty  one  years  to  come.  As  the  English  had  by 
this  time  began  the  settlement  of  plantations  in  the 
West  Indies,  negroes  were  in  such  demand,  as  to 
induce  the  new  company,  at  a  great  expense,  to 
erect  forts  and  vyarehouses  on  the  coast,  for  the 
protection  of  their  commerce;  but  so  many  private 
adventurers  and  interlopers  of  all  nations,  broke  in 
upon  them,  as  in  effect  to  force  the  trade  open, 
and  so  it  continued  until  after  the  restoration  of 
Charles  II, 

In  the  year  1662,  a  third  exclusive  African  com¬ 
pany  was  incorporated,  consisting  of  many  persons 
of  high  rank  and  distinction;  at  the  head  of  whom 
was  the  king’s  brother,  the  duke  of  York.  This 
company  undertook  to  supply  our  West  Indian 

*  Queen  Elizabeth  is  said  to  have  granted  a  patent  in  the  30th  year 
©f  her  reign,  for  carrying  on  an  exclusive  trade  from  the  river  Sene¬ 
gal  to  a  hundred  leagues  beyond  Sierra  Leone;  but  I  do  not  find  that 
any  voyage  was  ever  made  in  consequence  of  it. 


243 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

plantations  with  3000  negroes  annually;  but  in 
1664,  the  king  intending  to  make  war  on  the 
Dutch,  secretly  sent  Sir  Robert  Holmes  to  the 
coast,  with  orders  to  seize  the  Dutch  forts  near 
Cape  Verde;  in  which  service  Holmes  succeeded, 
and  built  at  the  same  time  a  new  fort  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river  Gambia,  called  James  Fort,  which  we 
still  hold.  Thence  sailing  southward,  he  mastered 
all  the  Dutch  factories  on  the  Guinea  coast,  except 
St.  George  D’Elmina  and  Acheen;  all  of  which 
were  however  retaken  in  1665,  by  De  Ruyter,  the 
Dutch  admiral;  together  with  the  fort  of  Koro- 
mantyn,  belonging  to  the  English  company,  which 
(if  I  mistake  not)  the  Dutch  hold  at  this  day,  by 
the  name  of  Fort  Amsterdam. 

In  1672,  (the  third  company  having  in  this  year 
surrendered  their  charter  to  the  crown),  the  fourth 
and  last  exclusive  company  was  established.  It 
was  dignified  by  the  title  of  the  Royal  African 
Company,  and  had,  among  the  subscribers,  the 
king,  the  duke  of  York,  and  many  other  persons 
of  high  rank  and  quality;  and  the  whole  capital  of 
.£.111,000  was  raised  in  nine  months.  Out  of 
this  subscription,  the  late  company  was  allowed 
«£. 34,000  for  their  three  forts  of  Cape  Coast  Cas¬ 
tle,  Sierra  Leone,  and  James  Fort.  The  new 
company  soon  improved  their  trade,  and  increased 
the  number  of  their  forts ;  and,  as  all  former  com¬ 
panies  were  obliged  to  send  to  Holland  to  make  up 
an  assortment  for  the  cargoes  of  their  ships,  they 
now  introduced  into  England  the  making  of  sun- 


WEST  INDIES. 


CKAP.  H.] 


24-9 


dry  kinds  of  woollen  goods,  and  other  manufac¬ 
tures  not  before  known;  and  they  imported  from 
the  coast  great  quantities  of  gold,  out  of  which, 
in  1673,  50,000  guineas  (so  named  from  the  coun¬ 
try)  were  coined.  They  also  imported  redwood 
for  dyers,  ivory,  wax,  and  some  other  valuable 
commodities,  and  they  exported  to  the  value  of 
*£*70,000  annually  in  English  goods. 


But  the  revolution  in  1688  changed  the  scene; 
for  by  the  1st  of  William  and  Mary,  as  the  Petition 
and  Declaration  of  Right  is  commonly  called,  the 
African  and  all  other  exclusive  companies  not  au¬ 
thorised  by  parliament,  were  abolished:  the  Afri¬ 
can  trade,  therefore,  became  in  fact,  free  and  open; 
although  the  company  still  persisted  in  seizing  the 
ships  of  separate  traders;  a  measure  which  occa¬ 
sioned  much  clamour,  and  no  small  obstruction  to 
the  negro  trade.  The  disputes  which  this  conduct 
gave  rise  to,  are,  however,  too  uninteresting  at 
present  to  be  brought  again  to  remembrance. 

In  1689  was  established  the  first  Assiento  compa¬ 
ny  for  supplying  the  Spanish  West  Indies  with  ne¬ 
groes  from  Jamaica;  and  in  1698  the  trade  to  Afri¬ 
ca,  which,  by  the  Petition  of  Right,  was  virtually 
laid  open,  was  expressly  made  so,  under  certain 
conditions;  for  by  statutes  9  and  IQth  of  Will,  and 
.Mary,  c.  26.  it  was  enacted—- 

£C  That  for  the  preservation  of  the  trade,  and  for 
the  advantage  of  England  and  its  colonies,  it  should 
Vol,  II.  1 1 


250  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

be  lawful  for  any  of  the  subjects  of  his  majesty’s 
realm  of  England,  as  well  as  for  the  company, 
to  trade  from  England  and  the  plantations  in  Ame¬ 
rica  to  Africa,  between  cape  Mount  and  the  cape 
of  Good  Hope;  upon  paying  for  the  aforesaid  uses 
a  duty  of  10  per  cent,  ad  valorem,  for  the  goods  ex¬ 
ported  from  England  or  the  plantations,  to  be  paid 
to  the  collector  at  the  time  of  entry  outwards,  for 
the  use  of  the  company. 

The  same  liberty  was  given  to  trade  between 
cape  Blanco  and  cape  Mount ;  but,  in  addition  to 
the  ten  per  centum  on  exportation,  there  was 
to  be  paid  a  further  sum  of  ten  per  centum  ad 
valorem,  on  all  goods  and  merchandize,  red- 
wood  excepted,  which  was  to  pay  only  five  per 
centum  at  the  place  of  exportation,  imported 
into  England,  or  the  plantations,  from  the  coast 
between  cape  Blanco  and  cape  Mount.  The  du¬ 
ties  so  paid  were  to  be  applied  to  the  maintenance 
of  the  forts  and  castles,  and  the  providing  ammu¬ 
nition,  and  soldiers.  The  company  were  yearly  to 
render  an  account  of  the  receipt  of  these  duties  and 
their  application,  to  the  cursitor  baron  of  exche¬ 
quer. 

Persons  paying  these  duties  were  to  have  the 
same  protection  and  defence  for  their  persons,  ships, 
and  goods,  from  the  forts  and  castles,  and  the  same 
freedom  and  security  for  their  negotiations  and 
trade,  as  the  company.  They  might  settle  facto¬ 
ries  within  their  limits,  and  were  to  be  free  from 
all  molestations  from  the  company. 


GHAP.  II.]  WEST  INDIES.  25 1 

No  duty  imposed  by  this  act  was  to  extend  to 
negroes  exported,  or  to  gold  and  silver,  nor  was 
the  act  to  be  so  construed  as  to  hinder  any  one  from 
trading  to  that  part  of  Africa  commonly  called 
South  Barbary,  extending  southerly  as  far  as  cape 
Blanco.” 

Against  the  regulations  of  this  law,  which  was 
to  continue  in  force  for  ]  3  years,  both  the  com¬ 
pany  and  many  of  the  private  traders  remonstrated 
without  effect;  and  the  company’s  affairs,  in  the 
course  of  a  few  years,  declined  to  so  great  a  de¬ 
gree,  that  they  were  unable  either  to  support  their 
factories  with  new  investments,  or  to  pay  the  debts 
which  they  had  already  incurred.  Parliament,  at 
length,  was  induced  to  give  them  some  assistance; 
and  in  1739  voted  £.  10,000  for  that  purpose,  and 
the  like  sum  annually  until  the  year  1744,  when, 
by  reason  of  the  war  with  France  and  Spain,  the 
grant  was  doubled.  In  each  of  the  two  succeeding 
years  <£.10,000  was  again  voted; — but  nothing  was 
granted  for  1747. 

In  the  year  1750,  the  African  trade,  after  having 
passed,  as  we  have  seen,  through  different  consti¬ 
tutions  and  conditions,  assumed  a  new  appearance; 
for  in  that  year  the  law  took  place  under  which  it 
still  exists,  and  is  at  present  regulated.  It  is  in- 
titled,  <f  An  act  for  extending  and  improving  the 
trade  to  Africa;”  the  terms  and  conditions  whereof 
I  need  not  set  forth,  as  the  act  itself  is  so  easily 
referred  to.  Of  the  several  countries,  however 


252  HISTORY  OF  THE  [took  m 

with*  which  the  trade  is  at  present  carried  on,  and 
the  state  of  it  for  some  years  past,  some  particu¬ 
lars  may  be  necessary.  My  account  will  be  brief ; 
there  being  many  descriptions  of  Guinea  extant ; 
and  an  abridgment  and  summary  of  the  best  histo¬ 
ries  (collated  and  arranged  with  great  judgment  and 
accuracy)  are  given  to  the  public  in  Astley’s  collec¬ 
tion  of  voyages  $  wherein  the  reader  will  find 
much  curious  and  useful  information.* 

That  part  then  of  the  African  coast  on  the  At¬ 
lantic  ocean,  with  which  the  people  of  Europe 
have  an  intercourse,  extends  from  cape  Blanco, 
in  21  degrees  north  latitude,  to  a  Portuguese 
settlement  called  Loango  St.  Paul's ,  in  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Angola,  latitude  9  degrees  south,  com¬ 
prehending  a  line  of  coast  of  upwards  of  1,300 
English  leagues,  and  consisting  of  various  countries, 
inhabited  by  a  great  number  of  savage  nations, 
differing  widely  from  each  other,  in  government, 
language,  manners,  and  superstitions. 

The  first  of  these  countries,  in  which  the  British 
have  an  establishment,  is  the  province  of  Sene- 
gambia;  including  the  river  Senegal,  which  opens 


*  In  the  year  1763,  Senegal  and  its  dependencies  were  vested  in  the 
African  company;  but  in  1765  the  same  became  vested  in  the  crown, 
and  the  trade  was  laid  open.  Thus  the  whole  African  trade  is  free  ta 
all  his  majesty’s  subjects ;  but  that  part  of  it  which  is  carried  on  be¬ 
tween  port  Sallee  and  cape  Rouge  is  under  the  direction  of  govern¬ 
ment.  From  cape  Rouge  to  the  cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  English 
forts  are  under  the  direction  of  a  committee  of  the  company. 


WEST  INDIES. 


^53* 


CHAP.  II.] 

into  the  Western  ocean  in  nearly  16  degrees,  and 
the  river  Gambia  in  13  and  a  half  degrees  north  la¬ 
titude.  Both  these  rivers  are  navigable  many  hun¬ 
dred  miles  up  the  country.  The  negroes  obtained 
from  this  part  of  Africa  are  known  to  the  West 
Indian  planters  by  the  general  name  of  M an  dingoes. 

From  cape  Roxo  (or  Rouge)  to  cape  Appollonia, 
the  European  settlements,  except  a  small  English 
factory  in  the  river  Sierra  Leone,  are  chiefly  those 
of  the  Portuguese. — The  negroes  obtained  through 
their  means  as  well  as  from  the  English  factory  are 
likewise  called  Mandingoes — I  believe  improperly; 
as  many  different  languages  are  spoken  on  the  coast 
between  Senegal  and  Appollonia.  This  part  of 
Africa  is  commonly  called  the  Windward  coast. 

The  Gold  coast  extends  from  cape  Appollonia 
to  the  river  Volta,  comprehending  a  line  of  100 
leagues.  The  maritime  country  is  divided  into  a 
number  of  petty  states  or  principalities,  seemingly 
independent  of,  and  often  at  war  with,  each  other ; 
the  chief  of  which  are  Axim,  Ante,  Adorn,  Jabi, 
Commani,  Fetu,  Sabou,  Fantyn  (a  rich  and  power¬ 
ful  people),  Acron,  and  Agonna;  some  of  which 
are  said  to  maintain  a  republican,  or  more  proper¬ 
ly  an  aristocratical,  form  of  government.  Of  the 
inland  country  we  know  but  little  more  than  that 
it  consists  of  three  extensive  kingdoms,  called  As- 
siantee  (or  Shantee),  Akim,  and  Aquambou ;  each 
of  which  supplies  the  maritime  states  with  great 
numbers  of  slaves,  which  they  sell  to  the  Europe- 


254 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

ans.  In  the  British  West  Indies,  most  of  the  ne¬ 
groes  purchased  on  the  Gold  coast,  are  known  by 
the  general  appellation  of  Koromantees ,  from  Ko- 
romantyn,  one  of  the  earliest  of  our  factories  on 
this  part  of  the  African  coast,  as  hath  been  already- 
observed,  but  which  is  now  become  an  insignifi¬ 
cant  village,  or  factory,  in  possession  of  the  Dutch. 
It  is  situated  in  the  kingdom  of  Fantyn,  two  miles 
from  the  fort  of  Anamaboe. — I  believe  that  the 
same,  or  different  dialects  of  the  same  language, 
is  spoken  throughout  all  the  Gold  coast  countries. 

From  the  river  Volta  to  the  river  Lagos,  extends 
the  Whidah  country,  (at  present  a  province  to  the 
king  of  Dahomey,  a  great  inland  kingdom),  by  some 
geographers  considered  as  part  of  the  Gold  coast ; 
by  others  denominated  The  Slave  Coast  proper.  It 
begins  with  the  small  and  barren  state  of  Koto  or 
Lampi,  next  to  which  is  the  kingdom  of  Adra, 
comprehending  the  subordinate  maritime  princi¬ 
palities  of  Great  and  Little  Popo,  or  Papaw;  from 
whence  the  Whidah  negroes  are  called  generally, 
by  the  British  traders,  Papaws.  The  Whidah  lan¬ 
guage,  except  as  to  the  inhabitants  of  Koto  is  pe¬ 
culiar  and  appropriate.  The  people  of  Koto  speak 
a  dialect  of  the  Gold  coast,  and  there  is  a  tribe  of 
Whidah  negroes  called  nagoes,  who  have  a  dialect 
which,  though  understood  by  the  Papaws,  differs 
from  the  Whidah  language  in  many  particulars. 

West  of  the  river  Lagos  begins  the  great  king¬ 
dom  of  Benin,  the  coast  of  which  forms  a  gulph 


255 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

or  bight,  ending  at  cape  Lopez,  wherein  are  situ¬ 
ated  the  trading  places  (being  so  many  villages  on 
the  banks  of  several  rivers)  of  Benin,  Bonny,  Old 
and  New  Callabar,  Cameron,  and  Gaboon. 

The  slaves  purchased  on  this  part  of  the  coast, 
have  the  general  denomination  of  Eboes ;  probably 
from  Arebo,  the  name  of  a  village,  formerly  a  con¬ 
siderable  town,  on  the  river  Benin.  Some  of  them 
(a  tribe,  I  believe,  from  the  interior  country)  are 
likewise  called  Mocoes.  In  language  they  differ 
both  from  the  Gold  Coast  negroes  and  those  of 
Whidah,  and  in  some  respects  from  each  other; 
for  from  Whidah  to  Angola,  the  dialects  vary  at 
almost  every  trading  river. 

From  Cape  Lopez  to  the  river  Congo,  distant 
140  leagues,  I  believe  the  trade  is  chiefly  en¬ 
grossed  by  the  Dutch  and  the  French.  To  the 
southward  of  this  river,  very  little  trade  is  carried 
on  by  any  Europeans  except  the  Portuguese,  who, 
as  hath  been  observed,  have  a  large  city  at  Loango 
St.  Paul’s,  on  the  coast  of  Angola,  strongly  fortifi¬ 
ed  5  from  which  place  they  have  penetrated  quite 
through  the  country  to  their  settlements  at,  and 
south  of  Mozambique,  upon  the  eastern  coast  of 
Africa,  where  they  have  caravans  constantly  going 
and  returning,  and  by  that  means  carry  on  an  ex¬ 
tensive  and  advantageous  inland  commerce. 

The  whole  number  of  forts  and  factories  esta¬ 
blished  on  the  coast  by  the  different  powers  of  Eu- 


i56  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

rope  is,  I  believe,  forty;  of  which  fourteen  belong’ 
to  the  English,  three  to  the  French,  fifteen  to,  the 
Dutch,  four  to  the  Portuguese,  and  four  to  the 
Danes. 

The  commodities  exported  by  the  British  traders 
to  Africa,  consist  chiefly  of  woollens,  linens,  Man¬ 
chester  goods,  Birmingham  and  Sheffield  goods; 
East  Indian  silks  and  mixed  goods;  English  printed 
callicoes  and  cottons;  ready  made  cloths,  musquets, 
bayonets,  cutlasses,  gunpowder,  shot,  wrought  and 
unwrought  brass  and  copper,  lead,  pewter,  wrought 
and  unwrought  iron,  hats,  worsted  caps,  earthen 
ware,  British  spirits,  rum  and  brandy,  tea,  sugar, 
coffee  and  provisions  of  every  kind. — The  annual 
value,  of  late  years,  is  estimated  on  an  average  at 
about  £. 800,000  sterling. 

In  some  parts  of  the  coast  there  is  a  duty  paid 
on  each  ship,  to  the  king  or  chief  man  of  the  coun¬ 
try;  which  is  called  his  customs.  In  other  parts 
this  is  not  exacted;  but  it  is  only  in  such  places  as 
have  but  little  trade.  When  permission  is  obtain¬ 
ed  to  trade,  the  slaves  are  sometimes  brought  by 
the  black  merchants  on  board  the  ships,  and  there 
sold;  and  sometimes  they  are  purchased  on  shore 
at  the  merchants  houses,  and  brought  off  to  the 
ships  by  the  captains ;  after  which  the  black  traders 
come  on  board  to  receive  payment.  In  these  par¬ 
ticulars,  circumstances  and  situations  very  often 
change  the  mode,  just  as  an  opposition  among  a 
number  of  purchasers  makes  it  more  or  less  necesr 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES,  257 

sary.  Many  of  the  factories  on  the  coast  are  pri¬ 
vate  property;  of  course  they  procure  slaves  for 
the  ships  in  their  own  concern.  Sometimes  they 
barter  slaves  with  strangers,  in  order  to  enlarge 
their  own  assortment  of  goods,  or  to  procure  some 
particular  commodities  of  which  they  are  in  want. 
Among  the  forts,  the  officers  that  belong  to  them 
carry  on  trade  more  or  less  with  the  shipping  as 
their  circumstances  will  admit,  and  according  as 
they  are  more  or  less  independent;  but  the  black 
traders  are  supposed  to  sell  their  slaves  about  forty 
shillings  each  cheaper  than  the  factories. 

In  those  parts  of  the  coast  to  which  shipping  re¬ 
sort  all  the  year,  the  intercourse  between  the  black 
traders  within  land,  (for  an  extent  as  yet  unexplo¬ 
red  by  any  white  person),  and  those  on  the  coast,  is 
constant  and  regular;  but  we  have  no  sufficiently 
precise  and  particular  account  of  the  manner  in 
which  this  constant  supply  of  slaves  for  sale  is  kept 
up  and  supported.  I  shall  hereafter  give  the  best 
information  I  have  been  able  to  collect  on  this  head. 
I  regret,  that  I  have  not  sufficient  materials  to  ena¬ 
ble  me  to  furnish  an  accurate  statement  of  the 
number  of  Africans  that  have  been  transported  to 
the  British  colonies  since  their  first  settlement. 
However,  that  curiosity  may  not  be  wholly  disap¬ 
pointed,  I  have  collected  such  materials  as  I  think 
will  enable  the  reader  to  form  some  judgment  in 
this  respect,  which  probably  will  not  be  very  wide 
ef  the  truth. 

k  k 


Voi.  n. 


-258  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  nr. 

In  the  various  publications  with  which  the  press 
abounded  during  the  time  that  the  disputes  be¬ 
tween  the  African  company  and  the  private  traders 
were  an  object  of  national  concern,  it  is  asserted 
by  one  party,  and  not  denied  by  the  other,  that 
about  140,000  negroes  had  been  exported  by  the 
company,  and  160,000  more  by  private  adventu¬ 
rers,  between  the  years  1680  and  1700:  Total 
300,000.  From  1700  to  December  1786,  the 
number  imported  into  Jamaica  was  610,000.  I 
say  this  on  sufficient  evidence,  having  in  my  pos¬ 
session  lists  of  all  the  entries..  Of  the  number  im¬ 
ported'  during  the  same  interval  into  the  southern 
provinces  of  North  America,  as  well  as  the  Wind¬ 
ward  Islands,  I  cannot  speak  with  precision;  but  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  the  Jamaica  import  may  fairly 
be  reckoned  one  third  of  the  whole.  On  these 
grounds,  the  total  import  into  all  the  British  colo¬ 
nies  of  America  and  the  West  Indies,  from  1680 
to  1786,  may  be  put  at  2,130,000,  being,  on  an 
average  of  the  whole,  20,095  annually.  This  I  ad¬ 
mit  is  much  less  than  is  commonly  supposed:  An¬ 
derson  roundly  fixes  the  annual  import  at  100,000; 
but  vague  and  general  assertions  prove  nothing. 
The  re-export  may  be  stated  at  about  one-fifth  part 
of  the  import. 

If  appears  to  me,  that  the  British  slave  trade  had 
attained  to  its  highest  pitch  of  prosperity  a  short 
time  before  the  commencement  of  the  late  Ameri¬ 
can  war.  The  following  has  been  given  to  the 
public  as  an  accurate  account  of  the  ships  which* 


chap,  ii.]  WEST  INDIES.  259 

sailed  from  England  for  the  coast  in  1771,  and  of 
the  number  of  slaves  for  the  purchase  and  trans¬ 
portation  of  which  they  were  sufficiently  provided, 
and  I  believe  its  authenticity  cannot  be  doubted; 
viz.  ✓ 
Of  the  miserable  people  thus  condemned  to  per¬ 
petual  exile  and  servitude,  though  born  in  various 
and  widely  separated  countries,  it  is  not  easy  to  dis¬ 
criminate  the  peculiar  manners  and  native  propen¬ 
sities.  The  similar  and  uniform  system  of  life  to 
which  they  are  all  reduced,;  the  few  opportunities 
and  the  little  encouragement  that  are  given  them  for 
mental  improvement,  are  circumstances  that  neces¬ 
sarily  induce  a  predominant  and  prevailing  cast  of 
character  and  disposition.  “  The  day,”  says  Ho¬ 
mer,  ‘c  which  makes  man  a  slave,  takes  away 
half  his  worth,”  and,  in  fact,  he  loses  every  im¬ 
pulse  to  action,  except  that  of  fear.  Nevertheless, 
there  are  among  several  of  the  African  nations  some 


262  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

striking  and  predominant  features,  which  cannot 
easily  be  overlooked  by  a  person  residing  in  any 
one  of  the  sugar  plantations.  These  peculiarities 
I  shall  endeavour  to  describe  with  candour  and  im¬ 
partiality;  after  which,  I  shall  attempt  a  delinea¬ 
tion  of  their  general  character,  as  it  is  displayed  un¬ 
der  all  the  various  modifications  and  circumstances 
of  original  habits,  and  present  situation  and  condi¬ 
tion. 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES, 


263 


CHAPTER  HI. 


Mandingoes,  or  natives  of  the  Windward  coast. — Maho¬ 
metans. — Their  roars,  manners,  and  persons. — Koro- 
mantyn  negroes,  or  natives  of  the  Gold  coast .- — Their 
ferociousness  of  disposition  displayed  by  an  account  of 
the  negro  rebellion  in  Jamaica  in  1760. — Their  na¬ 
tional  manners,  wars,  and  superstitions. — Natives  of 
Whidah  or  Fida. — Their  good  qualities. — Nagoes .- — 
Negroes  from  Benin, — persons  and  tempers.- — Cani- 
bals. — Natives  of  Kongo  and  Angola. — Survey  of  the 
character  and  dispositions  of  negroes  in  a  state  of 
slavery. 

OST,  if  not  all  the  nations  that  inhabit  that 


..VI  part  of  Africa  which  lies  to  the  northward 
and  eastward  of  Sierra  Leone,  are  Mahometans; 
and  following  the  means  of  conversion  prescribed 
by  their  prophet,  are,  as  we  are  told,  perpetually  at 
war  with  such  of  the  surrounding  nations  as  refuse 
to  adopt  their  religious  tenets.  The  prisoners  taken 
in  these  religious  wars  furnish,  I  doubt  not,  great 
part  of  the  slaves  which  are  exported  from  the  fac¬ 
tories  on  the  Windward  coast ;  and  it  is  probable. 


264  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

that  death  would  be  the  fate  of  most  of  the  cap¬ 
tives,  if  purchasers  were  not  to  be  met  with. 

But  the  Mandingoes  have  frequent  wars  with 
each  other,  as  well  as  with  such  nations  as  they 
consider  enemies  of  their  faith ;  and  I  am  afraid,  that 
some  of  these  wars  arise  from  motives  even  less 
justifiable  than  religious  zeal.  An  old  and  faithful 
Mandingo  servant,  who  stands  at  my  elbow  while 
I  write  this,  relates,  that  being  sent  by  his  father  to 
visit  a  distant  relation  in  a  country  wherein  the  Por¬ 
tuguese  had  a  settlement,  a  fray  happened  in  the 
village  in  which  he  resided:  that  many  people  were 
killed,  and  others  taken  prisoners,  and  he  himself 
was  seized  and  carried  off  in  the  skirmish  5  not,  as 
he  conceives,  by  a  foreign  enemy,  but  by  some  of 
the  natives  of  the  place  ;  and  being  sent  down  a 
river  in  a  canoe,  was  sold  to  the  captain  of  the  ship 
that  brought  him  to  Jamaica.  Of  his  national 
customs  and  manners  he  remembers  but  little,  be¬ 
ing  at  the  time  of  his  captivity,  but  a  youth.  He 
relates,  that  the  natives  practice  circumcision,  and 
that  he  himself  has  undergone  that  operation;  and 
he  has  not  forgot  the  morning  and  evening  prayer 
which  his  father  taught  him;  in  proof  of  this  asser¬ 
tion,  he  chaunts,  in  an  audible  and  shrill  tone,  a 
sentence  that  I  conceive  to  be  part  of  the  Alcoran, 
La  ilia ,  ill  ilia!*  which  he  says  they  sing  aloud  at 
the  first  appearance  of  the  new  moon.  He  relates, 
moreover,  that  in  his  own  country  Friday  was  con- 


*  There  is  no  God,  but  God. 


% 

chap,  nr.]  WEST  INDIES.  1  265 

stantly  made  a  day  of  strict  fasting.  It  was  almost 
a  sin,  he  observes,  on  that  day,  to  swallow  his 
spittle  ; — such  is  his  expression. 

Besides  this  man,  I  had  once  another  Mandingo 
servant,  who  could  write,  with  great  beauty  and 
exactness,  the  Arabic  alphabet,  and  some  passages 
from  the  Alcoran.  Whether  his  learning  extended 
any  further,  I  had  no  opportunity  of  being  inform¬ 
ed,  as  he  died  soon  after  he  came  into  my  pos¬ 
session. 

t 

The  advantage  possessed  by  a  few  of  these  peo¬ 
ple,  of  being  able  to  read  and  write,  is  a  circum¬ 
stance  on  which  the  Mandingo  negroes  in  the 
West  Indies  pride  themselves  greatly  among  the 
rest  of  the  slaves ;  over  whom  they  consider  that 
they  possess  a  marked  superiority;  and  in  truth, 
they  display  such  gentleness  of  disposition  and  de¬ 
meanour,  as  would  seem  the  result  of  early  edu¬ 
cation  and  discipline,  were  it  not  that,  generally 
speaking,  they  are  more  prone  to  theft  than  any  of 
the  African  tribes.  It  has  been  supposed  that  this 
propensity,  among  other  vices,  is  natural  to  a  state 
of  slavery,  which  degrades  and  corrupts  the  human 
mind  in  a  deplorable  manner;  but  why  the  Man- 
dingoes  should  have  become  more  vicious  in  this 
respect,  than  the  rest  of  the  natives  of  Africa  in  the 
same  condition  of  life,  is  a  question  I  cannot  an¬ 
swer. 


Vol.  II. 


0.66 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  ir. 

In  their  complexions  and  persons,  the  Mandin- 
goes  are  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  such  of  the 
Africans  as  are  born  nearer  to  the  equator;  but  they 
consist  nevertheless  of  very  distinct  tribes,  some  of 
which  are  remarkably  tall  and  black,  and  there  is 
one  tribe  among  them  (called  also  the  Foolah)  that 
seems  to  me  to  constitute  the  link  between  the 
Moors  and  negroes  properly  so  called.  They  are 
of  a  less  glossy  black  than  the  Gold  coast  negroes;- 
and  their  hair,  though  bushy  and  crisped,  is  not 
woolly,  but  soft  and  silky  to  the  touch.  Neither 
have  the  Mandingoes,  in  common,  the  thick  lips 
and  flat  noses  of  the  more  southern  natives;  and 
they  are  in  a  great  degree,  exempt  from  that 
strong  and  fetid  odour,  which  exhales  from  the  skirr 
of  most  of  the  latter ;  but  in  general  they  are  not 
well  adapted  for  hard  labour  A 

After  all,  they  differ  less  in  their  persons,  than 
in  the  qualities  of  the  mind,  from  the  natives  of 
the  Gold  coast;  who  may  be  said  to  constitute 
the  genuine  and  original  unmixed  negro,  both  in 
person  and  character,  j.: 


J  iieje  Is  a  icmaikable  anomaly  of  nature  sometimes  seen  in  the 
children  born  of  negro  women  by  black  men.  Their  features  ase 
those  of  the  negro,  but  their  complexions  are  white :  not  the  white 
or  the  European,  but  a  cadaverous  paleness  without  any  mixture  of 
red,  and  their  hair  is  of  the  same  colour,  though  crisped  asd  woolly. 
I  have  inspected  several  of  these  poor  creatures,  and  always  found 
them  weak  sighted,  and,  in  general,  defective  in  understanding.  These 
are  the  people  called  by  the  Spaniards  Albinos ;  but,  that  a  nation  of 
them  exists  in  any  part  of  the  world,  as  asserted  by  Voltaire,  I  do  not 
believe. 


.chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES.  267 

The  circumstances  which  distinguish  the  Koro- 
mantyn,  or  Gold  coast  negroes,  from  all  others, 
.are  firmness  both  of  body  and  mind;  a  ferociousness 
of  disposition ;  but  withal,  activity,  courage,  and  a 
stubbornness,  or  what  an  ancient  Roman  would  have 
deemed  an  elevation  of  soul,  which  prompts  them 
to  enterprizes  of  difficulty  and  danger;  and  enables 
them  to  meet  death,  in  its  most  horrible  shape, 
with  fortitude  or  indifference.  They  sometimes 
take  to  labour  with  great  promptitude  and  alacrity, 
and  have  constitutions  well  adapted  for  it;  for  many 
of  them  have  undoubtedly  been  slaves  in  Africa: — 
I  have  interrogated  great  numbers  on  this  subject, 
and  although  some  of  them  asserted  they  were  bom 
free,  who,  as  it  was  afterwards  proved  by  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  their  own  relations,  were  actually  sold  as 
slaves  by  their  masters,  others  frankly  confessed  to 
me,  that  they  had  no  claim  to  freedom  in  their  own 
country,  and  were  sold,  either  to  pay  the  debts,  or 
to  expiate  the  crimes,  of  their  owners.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Gold  coast  being  inhabited  by  va¬ 
rious  different  tribes  which  are  engaged  in  perpe¬ 
tual  warfare  and  hostility  with  each  other,  there 
cannot  be  a  doubt,  that  many  of  the  captives  taken 
in  battle,  and  sold  in  the  European  settlements, 
were  of  free  condition  in  their  native  country,  and 
perhaps  the  owners  of  slaves  themselves.  It  is  not 
wonderful  that  such  men  should  endeavour,  even 
by  means  the  most  desperate,  to  regain  the  freedom 
of  which  they  have  been  deprived;  nor  do  I  con¬ 
ceive,  that  any  further  circumstances  are  necessary 
to  prompt  them  to  action,  than  that  of  beins:  sold 


268 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

into  captivity  in  a  distant  country.  I  mean  only 
to  state  facts  as  I  find  them :  Such  I  well  know 
was  the  origin  of  the  negro  rebellion  which  hap¬ 
pened  in  Jamaica  in  1760.  It  arose  at  the  instiga¬ 
tion  of  a  Koromantyn  negro  of  the  name  of  Tacky, 
who  had  been  a  chief  in  Guinea;  and  it  broke  out 
on  the  frontier  plantation  in  St.  Mary’s  parish,  be¬ 
longing  to  the  late  Ballard  Beckford,  and  the  ad- 
joining  estate  of  Trinity,  the  property  or  my  de¬ 
ceased  relation  and  benefactor  Zachary  Bayly,  to 
whose  wisdom,  activity  and  courage  on  this  occa¬ 
sion,  it  was  owing,  that  the  revolt  was  not  as  ge¬ 
neral  and  destructive  as  that  which  now  rages  in 
St.  Domingo  (1791).  On  those  plantations  were 
upwards  of  one  hundred  Gold  coast  negroes  new¬ 
ly  imported,  and  I  do  not  believe,  that  an  indivi¬ 
dual  amongst  them  had  received  the  least  shadow 
of  ill  treatment  from  the  time  of  their  arrival  there. 
Concerning  those  on  the  Trinity  estate,  I  can  pro¬ 
nounce  of  my  own  knowledge,  that  they  were  un¬ 
der  the  government  of  an  overseer  of  singular  ten¬ 
derness  and  humanity.  His  name  was  Abraham 
Fletcher;  and  let  it  be  remembered,  in  justice  even 
to  the  rebels,  and  as  a  lesson  to  other  overseers, 
that  his  life  was  spared  from  respect  to  his  virtues. 
The  insurgents  had  heard  of  his  character  from  the 
other  negroes,  and  suffered  him  to  pass  through 
them  unmolested — this  fact  appeared  in  evidence.* 


*  Mr.  Bayly  had  himself  left  the  Trinity  estate  the  preceding  even-, 
ing,  after  having  personally  inspected  into  the  situation  of  his  newly 
purchased  Africans,  and  delivered  them  with  his  own  hands  their 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  269 

Having  collected  themselves  into  a  body  about  one 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  they  proceeded  to  the  fort 
at  Port  Maria;  killed  the  centinel,  and  provided 
themselves  with  as  great  a  quantity  of  arms  and 
ammunition  as  they  could  conveniently  dispose  of. 
Being  by  this  time  joined  by  a  number  of  their 
countrymen  from  the  neighbouring  plantations,  they 
marched  up  the  high  road  that  led  to  the  interior 
parts  of  the  country,  carrying  death  and  desolation 
as  they  went.  At  Ballard’s  valley  they  surrounded 


cloathing  and  knives ,  little  apprehending  the  bloody  business  in  which 
these  knives  were  soon  afterwards  employed.  He  slept  at  Ballard’s 
valley,  a  plantation  of  Mr.  Cruikshank,  a  few  miles  distant;  and 
was  awoke  by  his  servant  at  day-break,  with  the  information  that  his 
Trinity  negroes  had  revolted.  The  intelligence  was  brought  by  some 
of  his  own  people,  who  had  fled  in  search  of  their  master,  and  report¬ 
ed  that  the  insurgents'  were  close  at  their  heels.  No  time  there¬ 
fore  being  to  be  lost,  Mr.  Bayly  recommended  to  Mr.  Cruikshank, 
and  some  other  gentlemen  who  were  with  him,  to  proceed  forthwith, 
with  such  arms  as  they  could  collect,  to  an  estate  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  which  having  a  defensible  house,  was  fixed  on  as  a  proper  place 
of  rendezvous;  promising  to  join  them  in  a  few  hours.  He  then 
mounted  his  horse,  and  proceeded  himself  in  search  of  the  rebels,  con¬ 
ceiving  (as  he  knew  they  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  ill  treatment) 
that  his  presence  and  persuasions  would  reduce  them  to  obedience.  As 
he  descended  the  hill  on  which  Mr.  Cruikshank’s  house  was  situated, 
he  heard  the  Korosnantyn  yell  of  war,  and  saw  the  whole  body  of  re¬ 
bel  negroes  in  full  march  for  the  habitation  of  the  overseer;  a  smaller 
house  situated  within  half  a  mile  of  the  other.  He  approached  them 
notwithstanding,  and  waving  his  hat,  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  hearing, 
but  was  answered  by  a  discharge  of  musquetry,  by  which  his  ser¬ 
vant’s  horse  was  shot  under  him,  and  both  himself  and  the  servant 
very  narrowly  escaped  with  life.  The  Savages  then  proceeded  to  the 
piassacre  cf  the  white  people  in  the  overseer’s  house  ;  and  Mr.  Bayly 


1~]0 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iw 

the  overseet’s  house  about  four  in  the  morning,  in 
which  finding  all  the  white  servants  in  bed,  they 
butchered  every  one  of  them  in  the  most  savage 
manner,  and  literally  drank  their  blood  mixed  with 
rum.  At  Esher,  and  other  estates,  they  exhibited 
the  same  tragedy;  and  then  set  fire  to  the  build¬ 
ings  and  canes.  In  one  morning  they  murdered 
between  thirty  and  forty  whites  and  mulattoes,  not 
sparing  even  infants  at  the  breast,  before  their  pro¬ 
gress  was  stopped.  Tacky,  the  chief,  was  killed 
in  the  woods  by  one  of  the  parties  that  went  in 

rode  round  to  all  the  different  plantations  in  the  neighbourhood,  giving 
them  notice  of  their  danger,  and  sending  ali  the  whites  to  the  place 
of  rendezvous.  By  this  measure  he  had  collected  before  noon  about 
130  whites  and  trusty  blacks,  tolerably  armed  ;  whom  he  then  led  in 
pursuit  of  the  rebels.  They  were  found  at  Haywood-hall,  roasting 
an  ox  by  the  flames  of  the  buildings,  which  they  had  set  on  fire.  The 
whites  attacked  them  with  great  fury,  killed  eight  or  nine  on  the  spot, 
took  several  of  them  prisoners,  and  drove  the  rest  into  the  woods, 
where  they  acted  afterwards  wholly  on  the  defensive,  and  were  soon 
exterminated.  Thus  a  timely  check  was  given  to  a  conspiracy,  which 
was  found  to  have  been  general  among  the  Koromantjn  negroes 
throughout  the  island,  and  the  country  was  probably  saved  from  utter- 
destruction  by  the  prudence  and  promptitude  of  an  individual. — I  have 
related  these  cirsumstances  concerning  my  deceased  relation’s  conduct 
on  this  occasion  for  two  reasons;  first,  because  it  presents  an  example 
to  be  imitated  in  similar  emergencies;  and  secondly,  because  I  have 
thus  an  opportunity  given  me  of  paying  a  just  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  one,  whom  I  loved  and  honour.d  when  living,  and  lamented  when 
dead,  with  more  than  filial  affection  and  piety;  for  he  possessed  the 
clearest  head,  the  most  enlarged  and  comprehensive  mind,  the  sweetest 
temper,  and  the  kindest  and  most  benevolent  disposition,  of  any  man 
that  it  has  been  my  fortune  to  meet  with,  in  my  diversified  journey 
through  lift! — See  volume  i.  page  260. 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  -7 1 

pursuit  of  them ;  but  some  others  ot  the  ringlead¬ 
ers  being  taken,  and  a  general  inclination  to  re¬ 
volt  appearing  among  all  the  Koromantyn  negroes 
in  the  island,  it  was  thought  necessary  to  make 
a  few  terrible  examples  of  some  of  the  most  guilty. 
Of  three  who  were  clearly  proved  to  have  been 
concerned  in  the  murders  committed  at  Ballard’s 
valley,  one  was  condemned  to  be  burnt,  and  the 
other  two  to  be  hung  up  alive  in  irons,  and  left  to 
perish  in  that  dreadful  situation.  The  wretch  that 
was  burnt  was  made  to  sit  on  the  ground,  and  his 
body  being  chained  to  an  iron  stake,  the  fire  was 
applied  to  his  feet.  He  uttered  not  a  groan,  and 
saw  his  legs  reduced  to  ashes  with  the  utmost 
firmness  and  composure  ;  after  which,  one  of  his 
arms  by  some  means  getting  loose,  he  snatched  a 
brand  from  the  fire  that  was  consuming  him,  and 
filing  it  in  the  face  of  the  executioner.  The  two 
that  were  hung  up  alive  were  indulged  at  their 
own  request,  with  a  hearty  meal  immediately  be¬ 
fore  they  were  suspended  on  the  gibbet,  which 
was  erected  in  the  parade  of  the  town  of  Kingston. 
From  that  time,  until  they  expired,  they  never 
uttered  the  least  complaint,  except  only  of  cold 
in  the  night,  but  diverted  themselves  all  day  long 
in  discourse  with  their  countrymen,  who  were  per¬ 
mitted,  very  improperly,  to  surround  the  gibbet. 
On  the  seventh  day  a  notion  prevailed  among  the 
spectators,  that  one  of  them  wished  to  communi¬ 
cate  an  important  secret  to  his  master,  my  near 
relation;  who  being  in  St.  Mary’s  parish,  the  com¬ 
manding  officer  sent  for  me.  I  endeavoured  by 


*272  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv, 

means  of  an  interpreter,  to  let  him  know  that  I 
was  present ;  but  I  could  not  understand  what  he 
said  in  return.  I  remember,  that  both  he  and  his 
fellow  sufferer  laughed  immoderately  at  something 
that  occurred, — I  know  not  what.  The  next 
morning  one  of  them  silently  expired,  as  did  the 
other  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  day. 

The  courage,  or  unconcern,  which  the  people  of 
this  country  manifest  at  the  approach  of  death,  arises 
doubtless,  in  a  great  measure,  from  their  national 
manners,  wars,  and  superstitions,  which  are  all  in 
the  highest  degree,  savage  and  sanguinary.  A  pow¬ 
er  over  the  lives  of  his  slaves  is  possessed,  and  exer¬ 
cised  too,  on  very  frivolous  occasions,  without  com¬ 
punction  or  scruple,  by  every  master  of  slaves  on 
the  Gold  coast.  Fathers  have  the  like  power  over 
their  children.  In  their  wars  they  are  bloody  and 
cruel  beyond  any  nation  that  ever  existed  5  for  all 
such  of  their  captives  as  they  reserve  not  for  slaves, 
they  murder  with  circumstances  of  outrageous  bar¬ 
barity  ;  cutting  them  across  the  face,  and  tearing 
away  the  under  jaw,  which  they  preserve  as  a  tro¬ 
phy,  leaving  the  miserable  victims  to  perish  in  that 
condition.  I  have  collected  this  account  from 
themselves.  They  tell  me,  likewise,  that  when¬ 
ever  a  considerable  man  expires,  several  of  his 
wives,  and  a  great  number  of  his  slaves,  are  sa¬ 
crificed  at  his  funeral.  This  is  done  say  they,  that 
he  may  be  properly  attended  in  the  next  world. 
This  circumstance  has  been  confirmed  to  me  by 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  273 

every  Gold  coast  negro  that  I  have  interrogated  on 
the  subject,  and  I  have  inquired  of  many.*  In  a 
country  where  executions  are  so  frequent,  and  hu¬ 
man  blood  is  spilt  with  so  little  remorse,  death 
must  necessarily  have  lost  many  of  its  terrors ;  and 
the  natives  in  general,  conscious  they  have  no  se¬ 
curity  even  for  the  day  that  is  passing  over  them, 
seem  prepared  for,  and  resigned  to,  the  fate  that 
probably  awaits  them  .  This  contempt  of  death,  or 


*  The  following  particulars  1  collected  from  some  of  my  own  ICo- 
romantyn  Negroes,  whose  veracity  I  h  id  no  reason  to  doubt  i—'dlara, 
a  most  faithful  well  disposed  woman,  who  was  brought  from  the  Gold 
coast  to  Jamaica  the  latter  end  of  1784,  relates,  “  that  she  was  born 
in  a  village  near  Anamaboo;  that  her  father  and  mother,  and  their 
children,  (nine  in  number),  were  slaves  to  a  great  m  m  named  Anawoa> 
on  whose  death  she  herself,  and  two  of  her  brothers,  (who  likew.se  be¬ 
long  to  me),  with  several  others  of  his  slaves,  were  sold  to  pay  his 
debts.  That  twenty  others  were  killed  at  his  funeral.  I  asked  her 
which  country  she  liked  best,  Jamaica  or  Guinea  ?  She  replied,  that 
Jamaica  was  the  better  country,  £  for  that  people  were  not  killed  there , 
as  in  Guinea^  at  the  funeral  of  their  masters.'  She  informed  me  also, 
in  answer  to  some  other  inquiries,  of  a  remarkable  fact,  (i.  e.),  that 
the  natives  of  the  Gold  coast  give  their  children  the  yaws  (a  fright¬ 
ful  disorder)  by  inoculation  5  and  she  described  the  manner  of  per¬ 
forming  the  operation  to  be  making  an  incision  in  the  th'gh,  and  put¬ 
ting  in  some  of  the  infectious  matter.  I  asked  her  what  benefit  they 
expected  from  this  practice  ?  She  answered,  that  by  this  means  their 
infants  had  the  disorder  slightly,  and  recovered  speedily,  whereas 
by  catching  it.  at  a  later  time  of  life,  the  disease,  she  said,  ‘  got  into 
the  bone  5’  that  was  her  expression. 

Cudjoe,  aged  (as  I  suppose)  about  fifty,  relates,  that  he  was  born  in 
the  kingdom  of  Assiantee,  the  king  or  chieftain  of  which  country  was 
named  Poco.  Cudjoe’s  elder  brother  having  been  caught  m  adultery 
with  the  wife  of  a  man  named  Quashee,  was  adjudged  to  pay  a  fine  to 

Vo).  IT 


m  m 


274  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  tv. 

indifference  about  life,  they  bring  with  them  to 
the  West  Indies;  but  if  fortunately  they  fall  into 
good  hands  at  first,  and  become  well  settled,  they 
acquire  by  degrees  other  sentiments  and  notions. 
Nature  resumes  her  lawful  influence  over  them. 
With  the  consciousness  of  security,  the  love  of  ex¬ 
istence  also,  amidst  all  the  evils  that  attend  it  in  a 
state  of  slavery,  gains  admission  into  their  bosoms. 
They  feel  it,  and,  such  is  the  force  of  habitual  bar- 
baritv,  seem  ashamed  of  their  own  weakness.  A 
gentleman  of  Jamaica  visiting  a  valuable  Koroman- 

the  man  he  had  injured  ;  which  not  being  able  to  do,  he  delivered  over 
him  (Cudjoe)  who  was  at  that  time,  by  his  own  account,  a  boy  about 
sixteen,  as  a  compensation and  Qpashee  immediately  carried  him  off, 
and  soon  afterwards  sold  him  to  a  black  slave  merchant,  who  having 
purchased  many  others,  carried  them  all  to  the  sea  coast,  (they  were 
two  months  on  their  journey),  and  sold  them  to  a  Captain  Reeder,  who 
brought  them  to  Jamaica.  'I  asked  him,  what  right  his  brother  had 
to  sell  him  ?  *  Because ,’  said  he  ‘  my  father  was  dead  j  and  by  his  ac¬ 
count  fathers  have  an  unquestionable  right  to  sell  their  children,  and 
probably,  on  the  demise  of  the  father,  the  same  power  is  assumed  by 
the  eldest  son  over  the  younger  branches.  He  relates  further,  that  the 
king  has  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and  that  executions  are  very  fre¬ 
quent.  That  when  the  king  or  any  considerable  man  dies,  a  great 
number  of  his  slaves  are  sacrificed  at  his  tomb.  He  pretends  not  to 
ascertain  any  particular  number,  but  remembers  perfectly  well  the 
death  of  the  old  king  whom  poco  succeeded,  and  is  positively  certain, 
that  upwards  of  one  hundred  people  were  slaughtered  on  that  occa¬ 
sion.  To  convince  me  that  he  understood  what  he  said  when  he  men¬ 
tioned  that  number,  he  counted  the  fingers  of  both  his  hands  ten  times. 
He  saith  further,  that  wars  are  very  frequent ;  that  all  able  men  are 
compelled  to  bear  arms ;  and  that  when  they  take  prisoners,  the  old 
and  infirm  are  killed,  and  the  young  and  able  preserved  to  be  sold  for 
slaves. 


c€i ap.  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  275 

tyn  negro  that  was  sick,  and  perceiving  that  he  was 
thoughtful  and  dejected,  endeavoured,  by  soothing 
and  encouraging  language,  to  raise  his  drooping 
spirits.  Mass  a,  said  the  negro,  (in  a  tone  of  self- 
reproach  and  conscious  degeneracy),  since  me  come 
to  white  mans  country  me  tub  ( lore J  life  too  much! 

Even  the  children  brought  from  the  Gold  coast 
manifest  an  evident  superiority,  both  in  hardiness 
of  frame,  and  vigour  of  mind,  over  all  the  young 
.people  of  the  same  age  that  are  imported  from 
other  parts  of  Africa.  The  like  firmness  and  intre¬ 
pidity  which  are  distinguishable  in  adults  of  this 
nation,  are  visible  in  their  boys  at  an  age  which 
might  be  thought  too  tender  to  receive  any  lasting 
impression,  either  from  precept  or  example. — I 
have  been  myself  an  eye-witness  to  the  truth  of  this 
remark  in  the  circumstance  I  am  about  to  relate. 
A  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,  who  had  pur¬ 
chased  at  the  same  time  ten  Koromantyn  boys,  and 
the  like  number  of  Eboes,  (the  eldest  of  the  whole 
apparently  not  more  than  thirteen  years  of  age), 
caused  them  all  to  be  collected  and  brought  before 
him  in  my  presence,  to  be  marked  on  the  breast. 
This  operation  is  performed  by  heating  a  small  sil¬ 
ver  brand  composed  of  one  or  two  letters,  in  the 
flame  of  spirits  of  wine,  and  applying  it  to  the 
skin,  which  is  previously  anointed  with  sweet  oil. 
The  application  is  instantaneous,  and  the  pain  mo¬ 
mentary.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  easily  supposed 
that  the  apparatus  must  have  a  frightful  appearance 


276  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

to  a  child.  Accordingly,  when  the  first  boy,  who 
happened  to  be  one  of  the  Eboes,  and  the  stoutest 
of  the  whole,  was  led  forward  to  receive  the  mark, 
he  screamed  dreadfully,  while  his  companions  of 
the  same  nation  manifested  strong  emotions  of  sym¬ 
pathetic  terror.  The  gentleman  stopt  his  hand;  but 
the  Koromantyn  boys,  laughing  aloud,  and,  imme¬ 
diately  coming  forward  of  their  own  accord,  offered 
their  bosoms  undauntedly  to  the  brand,  and  recei¬ 
ving  its  impression  without  flinching  in  the  least, 
snapt  their  fingers  in  exultation  over  the  poor 
Eboes, 

*  ♦ 

One  cannot  surely  but  lament,  that  a  people 
thus  naturally  emulous  and  intrepid,  should  be 
sunk  into  so  deplorable  a  state  of  barbarity  and 
superstition ;  and  that  their  spirits  should  ever  be 
broken  down  by  the  yoke  of  slavery  !  Whatever 
may  be  alleged  concerning  their  ferociousness  and 
implacability  in  their  present  notions  of  right  and 
wrong,  1  am  persuaded  that  they  possess  qualities, 
which  are  capable  of,  and  well  deserve  cultivation 
and  improvement. — But  it  is  time  to  conclude  my 
observations  on  this  nation,  which  I  shall  do,  with 
some  account  of  their  religion;  for  which  my 
readers  are  indebted  to  the  researches  of  an  inge¬ 
nious  gentleman  of  Jamaica,  who  is  well  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  their  language  and  manners.  Its  authen¬ 
ticity  has  been  frequently  confirmed  to  me,  on  my 
own  inquiries  among  the  Koromantyn  negroes 
themselves, 


CHAP.  III.]  WEST  INDIES.  277 

They  believe  that  Accompojig,  the  God  of  the 
Heavens,  is  the  creator  of  all  things;  a  deity  of  in¬ 
finite  gfoodness;  to  whom  however  they  never  of- 
fer  sacrifices,  thinking  it  sufficient  to  adore  him 
with  praise  and  thanksgiving. 

Assarci  is  the  God  of  the  Earth;  to  him  they  of¬ 
fer  the  first  fruits  of  the  ground,  and  pour  out  liba¬ 
tions  of  the  liquors  they  drink  to  his  honour. 

Ipboa  is  the  God  of  the  Sea;  if  the  arrival  of  ships 
which  trade  upon  their  coast  is  delayed,  they  sacri¬ 
fice  an  hog  to  deprecate  the  wrath  of  Ipboa. 

Obboney  is  a  malicious  deity,  who  pervades  hea¬ 
ven,  earth,  and  sea;  he  is  the  author  of  all  evil,  and 
when  his  displeasure  is  signified  by  the  infliction 
of  pestilential  disorders,  or  otherwise,  nothing  will 
divert  his  anger  but  human  sacrifices  ;  which  are 
selected  from  captives  taken  in  war,  or  if  there  be 
none  present,  then  from  their  slaves. 

Besides  the  above  deities,  every  family  has  a  pe¬ 
culiar  tutelar  saint,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been 
originally  a  human  being  like  one  of  themselves, 
and  the  first  founder  of  their  family ;  upon  the  an¬ 
niversary  of  whose  burial,  the  whole  number  of  his 
descendants  assemble  round  his  grave,  and  the 
oldest  man,  after  offering  up  praises  to  Accom- 
pong,  Assarci,  Ipboa,  and  their  tutelar  deity,  sa¬ 
crifices  a  cock  or  goat,  by  cutting  its  throat,  and 
shedding  the  blood  upon  the  grave.  Every  head 


278  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

of  an  household  of  the  family,  next  sacrifices  a 
cock,  or  other  animal,  in  like  manner,  and  as  soon 
as  all  those  who  are  able  to  bring  sacrifices  have 
made  their  oblations,  the  animals  which  have  been 
killed,  are  dressed,  and  a  great  festival  follows. 

Among  their  other  superstitions  also,  must  not 
be  omitted  their  mode  of  administering  an  oath  of 
secrecy  or  purgation. — Human  blood,  and  earth 
taken  from  the  grave  of  some  near  relation,  are 
mixed  with  water,  and  given  to  the  party  to  be 
sworn,  who  is  compelled  to  drink  the  mixture, 
with  an  imprecation,  that  it  may  cause  the  belly 
to  burst,  and  the  bones  to  rot,  if  the  truth  be  not 
spoken.  This  test  is  frequently  administered  to 
their  wives,  on  the  suspicion  of  infidelity,  and  the 
resemblance  which  it  bears  to  the  trial  ot  jealousy 
by  the  bitter  water  described  in  the  book  of  Num¬ 
bers  (chap,  v.)  is  a  curious  and  striking  circum¬ 
stance. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  people  of  Whidah,  or  Fida. 
The  negroes  of  this  country  are  called  generally  in 
the  West  Indies  Papaws,  and  are  unquestionably  the 
most  docile  and  best-disposed  slaves  that  are  im¬ 
ported  from  any  part  of  Africa.  Without  the  fierce 
and  savage  manners  of  the  Koromantyn  negroes, 
they  are  also  happily  exempt  from  the  timid  and 
desponding  temper  of  the  Eboes,  who  will  pre¬ 
sently  be  mentioned.  The  cheerful  acquiescence 
with  which  these  people  apply  to  the  labours  of 
the  field,  and  their  constitutional  aptitude  for  such 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  279 

employment  arise,  without  doubt,  from  the  great 
attention  paid  to  agriculture  in  their  native  country. 
Bosman  speaks  with  rapture  of  the  improved  state 
of  the  soil,  the  number  of  villages,  and  the  indus¬ 
try,  riches,  and  obliging  manners  of  the  natives. 
He  observes,  however,  that  they  are  much  greater 
thieves  than  those  of  the  Gold  coast,  and  very  un¬ 
like  them  in  another  respect,  namely,  in  the  dread 
of  pain,  and  the  apprehension  of  death.  “They 
are,”  says  he,  “  so  very  apprehensive  of  death, 
that  they  are  unwilling  to  hear  it  mentioned,  for 
fear  that  alone  should  hasten  their  end ;  and  no  man 
dares  to  speak  of  death  in  the  presence  of  the 
king,  or  any  great  man,  under  the  penalty  of  suf¬ 
fering  it  himself,  as  a  punishment  for  his  presump¬ 
tion.”  He  relates  further,  that  they  are  addicted 
to  gaming  beyond  any  people  of  Africa.  All  these 
propensities,  if  I  am  rightly  informed,  are  observa¬ 
ble  in  the  character  of  the  Papaws,  in  a  state  of 
slavery  in  the  West  Indies.  That  punishment 
which  excites  the  Koromantyn  to  rebel,  and  drives 
the  Ebo  negro  to  suicide,  is  received  by  the  Pa¬ 
paws  as  the  chastisement  of  legal  authority,  to 
which  it  is  their  duty  to  submit  patiently.  The 
case  seems  to  be,  that  the  generality  of  these  peo¬ 
ple  are  in  a  state  of  absolute  slavery  in  Africa,  and, 
having  been  habituated  to  a  life  of  labour,  they 
submit  to  a  change  of  situation  with  little  reluct¬ 
ance. 

Many  of  the  Whidah  negroes  are  found  to  be 
circumcised.  Whether  it  be  a  religious  ceremony 


i8o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

common  to  all  the  tribes  that  go  under  the  appel¬ 
lation  of  Papaws,  I  know  not.  It  is  practised  uni¬ 
versally  by  the  Nagoes;  a  people  that  speak  the 
Whidah  language;  but  I  have  met  with  negroes 
from  this  part  of  the  coast  that  disavow  the  prac¬ 
tice. 

We  are  now  come  to  the  Bight  of  Benin,  com¬ 
prehending  an  extent  of  coast  of  near  300  English 
leagues,  of  which  the  interior  countries  are  un¬ 
known,  even  by  name,  to  the  people  of  Europe. 
All  the  negroes  imported  from  these  vast  and  un¬ 
explored  regions,  except  a  tribe  which  are  distin¬ 
guished  by  the  name  of  Mocoes ,  are  called  in  the 
West  Indies  Eboes  ;  and  in  general  they  appear  to 
be  the  lowest  and  most  wretched  of  all  the  nations 
of  Africa.  In  complexion  they  are  much  yellower 
than  the  Gold  coast  and  Whidah  negroes;  but  it 
is  a  sickly  hue,  and  their  eyes  appear  as  if  suffused 
with  bile,  even  when  they  are  in  perfect  health, 
I  cannot  help  observing  too,  that  the  conformation 
of  the  face,  in  a  great  majority  of  them,  very  much 
resembles  that  ot  a  baboon.  I  believe  indeed  there 
is,  in  most  of  the  nations  of  Africa,  a  greater 
elongation  of  the  lower  jaw,  than  among  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Europe  ;  but  this  distinction  I  think  is  more 
visible  among  the  Eboes,  than  in  any  other  Afri¬ 
cans.  I  mean  not  however  to  draw  any  conclusion 
of  natural  inferiority  in  these  people  to  the  rest  of 
the  human  race,  from  a  circumstance  which  per¬ 
haps  is  purely  accidental,  and  no  more  to  be  consi¬ 
dered  as  a  proof  of  degradation,  than  the  red  liair 


ckap.  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  281 

snd  hisrh  cheek  bones  of  the  natives  of  the  north  of 

o 

Europe. 

The  «:reat  objection  to  the  Eboes  as  slaves,  is 
their  constitutional  timidity,  and  despondency  or 
mind;  which  are  so  great  as  to  occasion  them  very 
frequently  to  seek,  in  a  voluntary  death,  a  refuge 
from  their  own  melancholy  reflections.  They  re¬ 
quire,  therefore,  the  gentlest  and  mildest  treatment 
to  reconcile  them  to  their  situation;  but  if  their 
confidence  be  once  obtained,  they  manifest  as  great 
fidelity,  affection,  and  gratitude,  as  can  reasonably 
be  expected  from  men  in  a  state  of  slavery.  The 
females  of  this  nation  are  better  labourers  than  the 
men,  probably  from  having  been  more  hardly  treat¬ 
ed  in  Africa. 

The  depression  of  spirits  which  these  people 
seem  to  be  under,  on  their  first  arrival  in  the  West 
Indies,  gives  them  an  air  of  softness  and  submis¬ 
sion,  which  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  the  frank 
and  fearless  temper  of  the  Koromantyn  negroes. 
Nevertheless,  the  Eboes  are  in  fact  more  truly  sa¬ 
vage  than  any  nation  of  the  Gold  coast,  inasmuch, 
as  many  tribes  among  them,  especially  the  Moco 
tribe,  have  been,  without  doubt,  accustomed  to 
the  shocking  practice  of  feeding  on  human  flesh. 
This  circumstance  I  have  had  attested  beyond  the 
possibility  of  dispute,  by  an  intelligent  trust-worthy 
domestic  of  the  Ebo  nation,  who  acknowledged  to 
me,  though  with  evident  shame  and  reluctance, 
(having  lived  many  years  among  the  whites),  that 
Vol.  II . 


n  n 


2^2 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it. 

he  had  himself,  in  his  youth,  frequently  regaled  on 
this  horrid  banquet:  and  his  account  received  a 
shocking  confirmation  from  a  circumstance  which 
occurred  in  the  year  1770  in  Antigua,  where  two 
negroes  of  the  same  country  were  tried  for  killing 
and  devouring  one  of  their  fellow-slaves  in  that 
island.  They  were  purchased,  a  short  time  before, 
by  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Christian,  out  of  a 
ship  from  Old  Calabar,  and  I  am  told  were  convict¬ 
ed  on  the  clearest  evidence. 

Of  the  religious  opinions  and  modes  of  worship 
of  the  Eboes,  we  know  but  little  }  except  that, 
like  the  inhabitants  of  Whidah,  they  pay  adoration 
to  certain  reptiles,  of  which  the  guana  (a  species- 
of  lizard)  is  in  the  highest  estimation.*  They  uni¬ 
versally  practice  circumcision,  cs  which  with  some 

*  I  have  been  assured  by  an  intelligent  person  who  had  visited  ma¬ 
ny  parts  of  Africa,  that  the  Eboes  frequently  offer  up  human  sacrifices 
in  their  worship  of  this  animal.  Perhaps  the  certainty  of  this  may  be 
questioned;  but  the  following  anecdote  is  undoubtedly  true.  In  the 
year  1787,  two  of  the  seamen  of  a  Liverpool  ship  trading  at  Bonny, 
being  ashore  watering,  had  the  misfortune  to  kill  a  guana,  as  they 
were  rolling  a  cask  to  the  beach.  An  outcry  was  immediately  raised 
among  the  natives,  and  the  boat’s  crew  were  surrounded  and  seized, 
and  all  trade  interdicted,  until  public  justice  should  be  satisfied  and 
appeased.  The  offenders,  being  carried  before  the  king,  or  chief  man 
of  the  place,  were  adjudged  to  die.  However,  the  severity  of  justice 
being  softened  by  a  bribe  from  the  captain,  the  sentence  was  at  length- 
changed  to  the  following,  that  they  should  pay  a  fine  of  700  bars 
(about  £.75")  and  remain  in  the  country  as  slaves  to  the  king,  until 
the  money  should  be  raised.  The  captain  not  being  willing  to  advance 
so  large  a  sum  for  the  redemption  of  these  poor  wretches,  sailed  with¬ 
out  them,  and  whai  became  of  them  afterwards,  I  have  not  heard* 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  283 

other  of  their  superstitions  (says  Purchas)  may 
seem  Mahometan,  but  are  more  likely  to  be  anci¬ 
ent  Ethnic  rights;  for  many  countries  of  Africa  ad¬ 
mit  circumcision,  and  yet  know  not,  or  acknow¬ 
ledge  not,  Mahometanism;  but  are  either  Christi¬ 
ans,  as  the  Cophti,  Abyssinians,  or  Gentiles.  They 
(the  people  of  Benin)  cut  or  raise  the  skin  with 
three  lines  drawn  to  the  navel,  esteeming  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  salvation. 

Next  in  order  to  the  Whidah  negroes,  are  those 
from  Congo  and  Angola;  whom  I  consider  to  have 
been  originally  the  same  people.  I  can  say  but  lit¬ 
tle  of  them  that  is  appropriate  and  particular;  ex¬ 
cept  that  they  are  in  general  a  slender  sightly  race, 
of  a  deep  and  glossy  black,  (a  tribe  of  the  Congoes 
excepted,  who  very  nearly  resemble  the  Eboes), 
and  I  believe  of  a  disposition  naturally  mild  and  do¬ 
cile.  They  appear  to  me  to  be  fitter  for  domestic 
service  than  for  field  labour.  They  are  said  howe¬ 
ver  to  become  expert  mechanics;  and  what  is 
much  to  their  honour,  they  are  supposed  to  be 
.more  strictly  honest  than  many  other  of  the  Afri¬ 
can  tribes. 

Having  thus  recited  such  observations  as  have  "~ 
occurred  to  me  on  contemplating  the  various  Afri¬ 
can  nations  in  the  West  Indies  separately  and  dis¬ 
tinct  from  each  other,  I  shall  now  attempt  an  esti¬ 
mate  of  their  general  character  and  dispositions,  in¬ 
fluenced,  as  undoubtedly  they  are,  in  a  great  degree, 
by  their  situation  and  condition  in  a  state  of  slave- 


284  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

ry ;  circumstances  that  soon  efface  the  native  origi¬ 
nal  impression  which  distinguishes  one  nation  from 
another  in  negroes  newly  imported,  and  create  a  si¬ 
militude  of  manners,  and  a  uniformity  of  character 
throughout  the  whole  body. 

Thus,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  related  of 
the  firmness  and  courage  of  the  natives  of  the  Gold 
coast,  it  is  certain,  that  the  negroes  in  general  in 
our  islands  (such  of  them  at  least  as  have  been  any 
length  of  time  in  a  state  of  servitude)  are  of  a  dis¬ 
trustful  and  cowardly  disposition.  So  degrading  is 
the  nature  of  slavery,  that  fortitude  of  mind  is  lost 
as  free  agency  is  restrained.  To  the  sarnie  cause, 
probably,  must  be  imputed  their  propensity  to  con¬ 
ceal,  or  violate  the  truth;  which  is  so  general,  that 
I  think  the  vice  of  falsehood  is  one  of  the  most 
prominent  features  in  their  character.  If  a  negro 
is  asked  even  an  indifferent  question  by  his  master, 
he  seldom  gives  an  immediate  reply ;  but,  affecting 
not  to  understand  what  is  said,  compels  a  repetff 
tion  of  the  question,  that  he  may  have  time  to  con¬ 
sider,  not  what  is  the  true  answer,  but  what  is  the 
most  politic  one  for  him  to  give.  The  proneness 
observable  in  many  of  them  to  the  vice  of  theft, 
has  already  been  noticed ;  and  I  am  afraid  that  evil 
communication  makes  it  almost  general. 

It  is  no  easy  matter,  I  confess,  to  discriminate 
those  circumstances  which  are  the  result  of  proxi¬ 
mate  causes,  from  those  which  are  the  effects  of 
national  customs  and  early  habits  in  savage  life;  but 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  285 

I  am  afraid,  that  cowardice  and  dissimulation  have 
been  the  properties  of  slavery  in  all  ages,  and  will 
continue  to  be  so,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  It  is 
a  situation  that  necessarily  suppresses  many  of  the 
best  affections  of  the  human  heart. — If  it  calls  forth 
any  latent  virtues,  they  are  those  of  sympathy  and 
compassion  towards  persons  in  the  same  condition 
of  life  3  and  accordingly  we  find  that  the  negroes  in 
general  are  strongly  attached  to  their  countrymen, 
but  above  all,  to  such  of  their  companions  as  came 
in  the  same  ship  with  them  from  Africa.  This  is 
a  striking  circumstance:  the  term  shipmate  is  un¬ 
derstood  among  them  as  signifying  a  relationship  of 
the  most  endearing  nature;  perhaps,  as  recalling 
the  time  when  the  sufferers  were  cut  off  together 
from  their  common  country  and  kindred,  and  awa¬ 
kening  reciprocal  sympathy,  from  the  remembrance 
of  mutual  affliction. 

But  their  benevolence,  with  a  very  few  excep¬ 
tions,  extends  no  further.  The  softer  virtues  are 
seldom  found  in  the  bosom  of  the  enslaved  African. 
Give  him  sufficient  authority,  and  he  becomes  the 
most  remorseless  of  tyrants.  Of  all  the  degrees  of 
wretchedness  endured  by  the  sons  of  men,  the 
greatest,  assuredly,  is  the  misery  which  is  felt  by 
those  who  are  unhappily  doomed  to  be  the  slaves  of 
slaves;  a  most  unnatural  relation,  which  sometimes 
takes  place  in  the  sugar  plantations;  as  for  instance, 
when  it  is  found  necessary  to  instruct  young  ne¬ 
groes  in  certain  trades  or  handicraft  employments. 
In  those  cases  it  is  usual  to  place  them  in  a  sort  of 
apprenticeship  to  such  of  the  old  negroes  as  are 


286 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

competent  to  give  them  instructions  5  but  the  harsh¬ 
ness  with  which  these  people  enforce  their  autho¬ 
rity,  is  extreme  5  and  it  serves,  in  some  degree,  to 
lessen  the  indignation  which  a  good  mind  necessa¬ 
rily  feels  at  the  abuses  of  power  by  the  whites,  to 
observe,  that  the  negroes  themselves,  when  invest¬ 
ed  with  command,  give  full  play  to  their  revenge¬ 
ful  passions;  and  exercise  all  the  wantonness  of 
cruelty  without  restraint  or  remorse. 

The  same  observation  may  be  made  concern¬ 
ing  their  conduct  towards  the  inferior  animal  cre¬ 
ation.  Their  treatment  of  cattle  under  their  direc¬ 
tion  is  brutal  beyond  belief.  Even  the  useful  and 
social  qualities  of  the  dog  secure  to  him  no  kind 
usage  from  an  African  master.  Although  them  is 
scarce  a  negro  that  is  not  attended  by  one,  they 
seem  to  maintain  these  poor  animals  solely  for  the 
purpose  of  having  an  object  whereon  to  exercise 
their  caprice  and  cruelty.  And,  by  the  way,  it  is  a 
singular  circumstance,  and  not  the  less  true  for  being 
somewhat  ludicrous,  that  the  animal  itself,  when 
the  property  of  a  negro,  betrays  at  first  sight  that 
such  is  his  condition;  for  losing  his  playful  propen¬ 
sities,  he  seems  to  feel  the  inferiority  of  his  sta¬ 
tion,  and  actually  crouches  before  such  of  his  own 
species  as  are  used  to  better  company.  With  the 
manners,  he  acquires  also  the  cowardly,  thievish, 
and  sullen  disposition  of  his  African  tyrant. 

But,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  related  of 
the  selfish  and  unrelenting  temper  of  the  enslaved 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  287 

Africans,  they  are  said  to  be  highly  susceptible  of 
the  passion  of  love.  It  has  even  been  supposed 
that  they  are  more  subject  to,  and  sensible  of  its 
impression,  than  the  natives  of  colder  climates. 
“  The  negro  (says  Dr.  Robertson)  glows  with  all 
the  warmth  of  desire  natural  to  his  climate.”  “  The 
tender  passion  (says  another  writer)  is  the  most  ar¬ 
dent  one  in  the  breast  of  the  enslaved  African. — It 
is  the  only  source  of  his  joys,  and  his  only  solace  in 
affliction.”  Monsieur  de  Chanvalon  (the  historian  of 
Martinico)  expatiates  on  the  same  idea  with  great- 
eloquence. — “  Love,  says  he,  the  child  of  nature, 
to  whom  she  intrusts  her  own  preservation;  whose 
progress  no  difficulties  can  retard,  and  who  tri¬ 
umphs  even  in  chains ;  that  principle  of  life,  as 
necessary  to  the  harmony  of  the  universe,  as  the 
air  which  we  breathe,  inspires  and  invigorates  all 
the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  the  negro,  and  light¬ 
ens  the  yoke  of  his  slavery.  No  perils  can  abate, 
nor  impending  punishments  restrain,  the  ardour  of 
his  passion. — He  leaves  his  master’s  habitation,  and 
traversing  the  wilderness  by  night,  disregarding  its 
noxious  inhabitants,  seeks  a  refuge  from  his  sor¬ 
rows,  in  the  bosom  of  his  faithful  and  affectionate 
mistress.” 

All  this  however  is  the  language  of  poetry  and 
the  visions  of  romance.  The  poor  negro  has  no 
leisure  in  a  state  of  slavery  to  indulge  a  passion, 
which,  however  descended,  is  nourished  by  idle¬ 
ness.  If  by  love,  is  meant  that  tender  attachment 
to  one  individual  object,  which,  in  civilized  life,  is 


288 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it, 

desire  heightened  by  sentiment,  and  refined  by  de¬ 
licacy,  I  doubt  if  it  ever  found  a  place  in  an  Afri¬ 
can  bosom. — The  negroes  in  the  West  Indies,  both 
men  and  women,  would  consider  it  as  the  greatest 
exertion  of  tyranny,  and  the  most  cruel  of  all  hard¬ 
ships,  to  be  compelled  to  confine  themselves  to  a 
single  connection  with  the  other  sex ;  and  I  am  per¬ 
suaded,  that  any  attempt  to  restrain  their  present  li¬ 
centious  and  dissolute  manners,  by  introducing  the 
marriage  ceremony  among  them,  as  is  strenuously 
recommended  by  many  persons  in  Great  Britain, 
would  be  utterly  impracticable  to  any  good  pur¬ 
pose.  Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  that  the  negroes 
are  not  altogether  reduced  to  so  deplorable  a  state 
of  slavery,  as  is  commonly  represented,  when  it  is 
known,  that  they  boldly  claim  and  exercise  a  right 
of  disposing  of  themselves  in  this  respect,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  own  will  and  pleasure,  without  any 
control  from  their  masters. 

That  passion,  therefore,  to  which  (dignified  by  the 
name  of  love)  is  ascribed  the  power  of  softening 
all  the  miseries  of  slavery,  is  mere  animal  desire, 
implanted  by  the  great  author  of  all  things  for  the 
preservation  of  the  species.  This  the  negroes, 
without  doubt,  possess  in  common  with  the  rest 
of  the  animal  creation,  and  they  indulge  it  as  in¬ 
clination  prompts,  in  an  almost  promiscuous  in¬ 
tercourse  with  the  other  sex;  or  at  least  in  tempo¬ 
rary  connections,  which  they  form  without  cere¬ 
mony,  and  dissolve  without  reluctance.  When  age 
indeed  begins  to  mitigate  the  ardour,  and  lessen 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES.  289 

the  fickleness  of  youth,  many  of  them  form  attach¬ 
ments,  which,  strengthened  by  habit,  and  endeared 
by  the  consciousness  of  mutual  imbecility,  produce 
a  union  for  life.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  behold  a 
venerable  couple  of  this  stamp,  who,  tottering  un¬ 
der  the  load  of  years,  contribute  to  each  other’s  com¬ 
fort  with  a  cheerful  assiduity  which  is  at  once  ami¬ 
able  and  affecting. 

The  situation  of  the  aged  among  the  negroes  is 
indeed  commonly  such  as  to  make  them  some 
amends  for  the  hardships  and  sufferings  of  their 
youth.  The  labour  required  of  the  men  is  seldom  any 
thing  more  than  to  guard  the  provision  grounds; 
and  the  women  are  chiefly  employed  in  attending 
the  children,  in  nursing  the  sick,  or  in  other  easy 
avocations;  but  their  happiness  chiefly  arises  from 
the  high  veneration  in  which  old  age  is  held  by  the 
negroes  in  general,  and  this  I  consider  as  one  of  the 
few  pleasing  traits  in  their  character.  In  addressing 
such  of  their  fellow-servants  as  are  any  ways  advan¬ 
ced  in  years,  they  prefix  to  their  names  the  appel¬ 
lation  of  parent,  as  Ta  Quaco,  and  Ma  Quasheba; 
Ta  and  Ma,  signifying  father  and  mother,  by  which 
designation  they  mean  to  convey  not  only  the  idea 
of  filial  reverence,  but  also  that  of  esteem  and 
fondness.  Neither  is  the  regard  thus  displayed 
towards  the  aged,  confined  to  outward  ceremonies 
and  terms  of  respect  alone.  It  is  founded  on  an 
active  principle  of  native  benevolence,  furnishing 
one  of  the  few  exceptions  to  their  general  unre¬ 
lenting  and  selfish  character.  The  whole  body  of 

VoL  II. 


o  o 


290 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

negroes  on  a  plantation  must  be  reduced  to  a  deplo¬ 
rable  state  of  wretchedness,  if,  at  any  time,  they 
suffer  their  aged  companions  to  want  the  common 
necessaries  of  life,  or  even  many  of  its  comforts,  as 
far  as  they  can  procure  them.  They  seem  to  me  to 
be  actuated  on  these  occasions  by  a  kind  of  involun¬ 
tary  impulse,  operating  as  a  primitive  law  of  nature, 
which  scorns  to  wait  the  cold  dictates  of  reason : 
among  them,  it  is  the  exercise  of  a  common  duty, 
which  courts  no  observation,  and  looks  for  no  ap¬ 
plause.* 


Among  other  propensities  and  qualities  of  the 
negroes  must  not  be  omitted  their  loquaciousness. 
They  are  as  fond  cf  exhibiting  set  speeches,  as  ora¬ 
tors  by  profession;  but  it  requires  a  considerable 
share  of  patience  to  hear  them  throughout;  for 
they  commonly  make  a  long  preface  before  they 
come  to  the  point :  beginning  with  a  tedious  enu¬ 
meration  of  their  past  services  and  hardships.  I  hey 
dwell  with  peculiar  energy  (if  the  facts  admits  it) 
on  the  number  of  children  they  have  presented  to 

*  The  greatest  affront  (says  Mr.  Long)  that  can  be  offered  to  a  ne¬ 
gro,  is  to  curse  his  father  and  mother,  or  any  of  his  progenitors.  It 
may  not  be  improper  in  this  place  to  add,  that  many  of  the  negroes 
attain  to  great  longevity. — -In  February  1792,  a  black  woman  of  the 
name  of  Flora  Gale,  died  at  the  very  extraordinary  age  of  lao,  at  Sa- 
vanna-la-Mar  in  Jamaica.  She  remembered  perfectly  well  the  great 
earthquake  in  1692,  which  proved  so  fatal  to  Port  Royal.  She  left 
a  numerous  progeny  of  children,  grand  and  great-grand  children,  and 
it  is  remarkable,  that  she  always  refused  to  be  baptized,  assigning  for 
reason  her  desire  to  have  a  grand  negro  dance  at  her  funeral,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  custom  of  Africa  :  a  ceremony  never  allowed  in  Jamaica  at 
the  burial  of  such  as  have  been  christened. 


2$1 


chap,  iii.]  WEST  INDIES. 

mass  a  (master),  after  which  they  recapitulate  some 
of  the  instances  of  particular  kindness  shewn  them 
by  their  owner  or  employer,  adducing  these  also  as 
proofs  of  their  own  merit ;  it  being  evident  they 
think,  that  no  such  kindness  can  be  gratuitous. 
This  is  their  usual  exordium,  as  well  when  they 
bring  complaints  against  others,  as  when  they  are 
called  upon  to  defend  themselves;  and  it  is  in  vain 
to  interrupt  either  plaintiff  or  defendant.  Yet  I 
have  sometimes  heard  them  convey  much  stronger 
meaning  in  a  narrow  compass:  I  have  been  surpri¬ 
sed  by  such  figurative  expressions,  and  (notwith¬ 
standing  their  ignorance  of  abstract  terms)  such 
pointed  sentences,  as  would  have  reflected  no 
disgrace  on  poets  and  philosophers.  One  instance 
recurs  to  my  memory,  of  so  significant  a  turn  of 
expression  in  a  common  labouring  negro,  who  could 
have  had  no  opportunity  of  improvement  from 
the  conversation  of  white  people,  as  is  alone,  I 
think,  sufflcienf  to  demonstrate  that  negroes  have 
minds  very  capable  of  observation.  It  was  a  servant 
who  had  brought  me  a  letter,  and,  while  I  was 
preparing  an  answer,  had,  through  weariness  and 
fatigue,  fallen  asleep  on  the  floor:  as  soon  as  the 
papers  were  ready,  I  directed  him  to  be  awaken¬ 
ed;  but  this  was  no  easy  matter.  When  the  negro 
who  attempted  to  awake  him,  exclaimed  in  the 
usual  jargon,  yon  no  hear  massa  rail  you  ?  that  is, 
don’t  you  hear  master  call  you  ?  Sleep,  replied  the 
poor  fellow,  looking  up,  and  returning  composedly 
to  his  slumbers,  sleep  hah  no  massa .  (Sleep  has  no 
master.) 


2(J2  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

Of  those  imitative  arts  in  which  perfection  can 
be  attained  only  in  an  improved  state  of  society,  it 
is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  negroes  have  but  lit¬ 
tle  knowledge.  An  opinion  prevails  in  Europe, 
that  they  possess  organs  peculiarly  adapted  to  the 
science  of  music;  but  this  I  believe  is  an  ill-found¬ 
ed  idea.  In  vocal  harmony  they  display  neither  va¬ 
riety  nor  compass.  Nature  seems  in  this  respect 
to  have  dealt  more  penuriously  by  them  than  to¬ 
wards  the  rest  of  the  human  race.  As  practical 
musicians,  some  of  them,  by  great  labour  and  care¬ 
ful  instruction,  become  sufficiently  expert  to  bear 
an  under  part  in  a  public  concert;  but  I  do  not  re¬ 
collect  ever  to  have  seen  or  heard  of  a  negro  who 
could  truly  be  called  a  fine  performer  on  any  capital 
instrument.  In  general,  they  prefer  a  loud  and 
long  continued  noise  to  the  finest  harmony,  and 
frequently  consume  the  whole  night  in  beating  on 
a  board  with  a  stick.  This  is  in  fact  one  of  their 
chief  musical  instruments;  besides  which,  they 
have  the  Banja  or  Merriwang,  the  Dundo,  and 
the  Goombay ;  all  of  African  origin.  The  first  is 
an  imperfect  kind  of  violincello;  except  that  it  is 
played  on  by  the  finger  like  the  guitar;  producing 
a  dismal  monotony  of  four  notes.  The  Dundo  is 
precisely  a  tabor;  and  the  Goombay  is  a  rustic 
drum;  being  formed  of  the  trunk  of  a  hollow  tree, 
one  end  of  which  is  covered  with  a  sheep’s  skin. 
From  such  instruments  nothing  like  a  regular  tune 
can  be  expected,  nor  is  it  attempted. 


2  93 


chap.  III.]  WEST  INDIES. 

Their  songs  are  commonly  impromptu ,  and  there 
are  among  them  individuals  who  resemble  the  irn- 
proviscitore,  or  extempore  bards,  of  Italy;  but  I 
cannot  say  much  for  their  poetry.  Their  tunes  in 
general  are  characteristic  of  their  national  manners; 
those  of  the  Eboes  being  soft  and  languishing;  of 
the  Koromantyns  heroic  and  martial.  At  the  same 
time,  there  is  observable,  in  most  of  them,  a  pre¬ 
dominant  melancholy,  which,  to  a  man  of  feeling, 
is  sometimes  very  affecting. 

At  their  merry  meetings,  and  midnight  festivals, 
they  are  not  without  ballads  of  another  kind,  adapt¬ 
ed  to  such  occasions ;  and  here  they  give  full  scope 
to  a  talent  for  ridicule  and  derision,  which  is  exer¬ 
cised  not  only  against  each  other,  but  also,  not  un- 
frequently,  at  the  expense  of  their  owner  or  em¬ 
ployer;  but  most  part  of  their  songs  at  these  places 
are  fraught  with  obscene  ribaldry,  and  accompanied 
with  dances  in  the  highest  degree  licentious  and 
wanton. 

At  other  times,  more  especially  at  the  burial  of 
such  among  them  as  were  respected  in  life,  or  ve¬ 
nerable  through  age,  they  exhibit  a  sort  of  Pyrr- 
hick  or  warlike  dance,  in  which  their  bodies  are 
strongly  agitated  by  running,  leaping,  and  jumping, 
with  many  violent  and  frantic  gestures  and  contor¬ 
tions.  Their  funeral  songs  too  are  all  of  the  he¬ 
roic  or  martial  cast;  affording  some  colour  to  the 
prevalent  notion,  that  the  negroes  consider  death 
not  only  as  a  welcome  and  happy  release  from  the 


294 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

calamities  of  their  condition,  but  also  as  a  passport 
to  the  place  of  their  nativity;  a  deliverance  which, 
while  it  frees  them  from  bondage,  restores  them  to 
the  society  of  their  dearest,  long-lost,  and  lamented 
natives  in  Africa.  But  I  am  afraid  that  this,  like 
other  European  notions  concerning  the  negroes,  is 
the  dream  of  poetry ;  the  sympathetic  effusion  of  a 
fanciful  or  too  credulous  an  imagination.*  The  ne¬ 
groes,  in  general,  are  so  far  from  courting  death,  that, 
among  such  of  them  as  have  resided  any  length  of 


*  Perhaps  it  was  some  such  imagination  that  gave  rise  to  the  follow¬ 
ing  little  poem,  the  production  of  early  youth,  and  now  published  for 
the  first  time. 

ODE  ON  SEEING  A  NEGRO  FUNERAL. 

Mahali  dies!  O’er  yonder  plain 
His  bier  is  borne  :  The  sable  train 
By  youthful  virgin’s  led  : 

Daughters  of  injur’d  Afric,  say, 

Why  raise  ye  thus  th’  heroic  lay. 

Why  triumph  o’er,  the  dead  ? 

No  tear  bedews  their  fixed  eye  : 

’Tis  now  the  hero  lives  they  cry 
Releas’d  from  slav’ry’s  chain  : 

Beyond  the  billowy  surge  he  flies. 

And  joyful  views  his  native  skies, 

And  long  lost  bowers  again. 

On  Koromantyn’s  palmy  soil 
Heroic  deeds  and  martial  toil, 

Shall  fill  each  glorious  day; 

Love,  fond  and  faithful,  crown  thy  nights, 

And  bliss  unbought,  unmix’d  delights, 

Past  cruel  wrongs  repay. 


ehap.  III.]  WEST  INDIES.  295 

time  in  the  West  Indies,  suicide  is  much  less  fre¬ 
quent  than  among  the  free-born,  happy,  and  civi¬ 
lized  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain.  With  them, 
equally  with  the  whites,  nature  shrinks  back  at  ap¬ 
proaching  dissolution;  and  when,  at  any  time,  sud¬ 
den  or  untimely  death  overtakes  any  of  their  com¬ 
panions,  instead  of  rejoicing  at  such  an  event,  they 
never  fail  to  impute  it  to  the  malicious  contrivances 
and  diabolical  arts  of  some  practitioners  in  ObeaJi, 

* 

Nor  lordly  pride’s  stern  avarice  there, 

Alone  shall  nature’s  bounties  share; 

To  all  her  children  free.—- 
For  thee,  the  dulcet  Reed  shall  spring, 

His  balmy  bowl  the  Coco  bring, 

Th’  Anana  bloom  for  thee. 

The  thunder,  hark  !  ’Tis  Afric’s  God, 

He  wakes,  he  lifts  th’  avenging  rod. 

And  speeds  th’  impatient  hours : 

From  Niger’s  golden  stream  he  calls; 

Fair  Freedom  comes, — oppression  falls  ; 

And  vengeance  yet  is  ours! 

Now,  Christian,  now,  in  wild  dismay, 

Of  Afric’s  proud  revenge  the  prey, 

Go  roam  th’  affrighted  wood 
Transform’d  to  tigers,  fierce  and  fell, 

Thy  race  shall  prowl  with  savage  yell. 

And  glut  their  rage  for  blood  ! 

But  soft, — beneath  yon  tam’rind  shade, 

Now  let  the  hero’s  limbs  be  laid  ; 

Sweet  slumbers  bless  the  brave  : 

There  shall  the  breezes  shed  perfume, 

Nor  livid  lightnings  blast  tiie  bloom 
That  decks  Mahali’s  grave. 


29G  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

a  term  of  African  origin,  signifying  sorcery  or 
witchcraft,  the  prevalence  of  which,  among  many 
of  their  countrymen,  all  the  negroes  most  firmly 
and  implicitly  believe.  We  may  conclude,  there¬ 
fore,  that  their  funeral  songs  and  ceremonies  are 
commonly  nothing  more  than  the  dissonance  of  sa¬ 
vage  barbarity  and  riot;  as  remote  from  the  fond 
superstition  to  which  they  are  ascribed,  as  from  the 
sober  dictates  of  a  rational  sorrow. 

Having  mentioned  the  practice  of  Obeah,  the 
influence  of  which  has  so  powerful  an  effect  on  the 
negroes  as  to  bias,  in  a  considerable  degree,  their 
general  conduct,  dispositions,  and  manners,  I  shall 
conclude  the  present  chapter,  by  presenting  to  my 
readers  the  following  very  curious  account  of  this 
extraordinary  superstition,  and  its  effects:  it  was 
transmitted  by  the  agent  of  Jamaica  to  the  lords  of 
the  committee  of  privy  council,  and  by  them  sub¬ 
joined  to  their  report  on  the  slave  trade;  and,  if  I 
mistake  not,  the  public  are  chiefly  indebted  for  it 
to  the  diligent  researches,  and  accurate  pen,  of 
Mr.  Long. 

fC  The  term  Obeah ,  Obiah ,  or  Obia ,  (for  it  is  va¬ 
riously  written),  we  conceive  to  be  the  adjective, 
and  Obe  or  Obi  the  noun  substantive;  and  that  by 
the  words  Obia- men  or  women,  are  meant  those 
who  practise  Obi.  The  origin  of  the  term  we 
should  consider  as  of  no  importance  in  our  answer 
to  the  questions  proposed,  if,  in  search  of  it, 
we  were  not  led  to  disquisitions  that  are  highly 


chap,  m.]  WEST  INDIES.  297 

gratifying  to  curiosity.  From  the  learned  Mr.  Bry¬ 
ant’s*  commentary  upon  the  word  Oph,  we  obtain 
a  very  probable  etymology  of  the  term — “  A  ser- 
«  pent  in  the  Egyptian  language  was  called  Ob  or 
Aub Obion  is  still  the  Egyptian  name  for  a 
«  serpent.” — Moses,  in  the  name  of  God,  for- 
“  bids  the  Israelites  ever  to  inquire  of  the  demon 
<c  Ob,  which  is  translated  in  our  Bible,  Charmer,  or 
■«  Wizard,  Devinator,  aut  Sorcilegus.” — “  The  wo- 
<s  man  at  Endor  is  called  Oub  or  Ob,  translated 
«  Pythonissa;  and  Oubaios  (he  cites  from  Horns 
<c  Apollo )  was  the  name  of  the  Basilisk  or  Royal 
tc  Serpent,  emblem  of  the  sun,  and  an  ancient  ora- 
«  cular  Deity  of  Africa.”  This  derivation,  which 
applies  to  one  particular  sect,  the  remnant  proba¬ 
bly  of  a  very  celebrated  religious  order  in  remote 
ages,  is  now  become  in  Jamaica  the  general  term 
to  denote  those  Africans  who  in  that  island  practise 
witchcraft  or  sorcery,  comprehending  also  the  class 
of  what  are  called  Myal-men,  or  those  who,  by 
means  of  a  narcotic  potion,  made  with  the  juice  of 
an  herb  (said  to  be  the  branched  Calalue  or  species 
of  Solanuirfi )  which  occasions  a  trance  or  profound 
sleep  of  a  certain  duration,  endeavour  to  convince 
the  deluded  spectators  of  their  power  to  re-ani¬ 
mate  dead  bodies. 


As  far  as  We  are  able  to  decide  from  our  own 
experience  and  information  when  we  lived  in  the 
island,  and  from  the  current  testimony  of  all  the 

*  Mythology,  vol.  i.  p.  48,  475,  and  478. 

Vol.  II.  p  p 


29B  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

negroes  we  Lave  ever  conversed  with  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  the  professors  of  Obi  are,  and  always  were, 
natives  of  Africa,  and  none  other;  and  they  have 
brought  the  science  with  them  from  thence  to  Ja¬ 
maica,  where  it  is  so  universally  practised,  that  we 
believe  there  are  few  of  the  large  estates  possessing 
native  Africans,  which  have  not  one  or  more  of 
them.  The  oldest  and  most  crafty  are  those  who 
usually  attract  the  greatest  devotion  and  confidence; 
those  whose  hoary  heads,  and  a  somewhat  peculi¬ 
arly  harsh  and  forbidding  in  their  aspect,  together 
with  some  skill  in  plants  of  the  medicinal  and 
poisonous  species,  have  qualified  them  for  success¬ 
ful  imposition  upon  the  weak  and  credulous.  The 
negroes  in  general,  whether  Africans  or  Creoles, 
revere,  consult,  and  fear  them;  to  these  oracles 
they  resort,  and  with  the  most  implicit  faith,  upon 
all  occasions,  whether  for  the  cure  of  disorders,  the 
obtaining  revenge  for  injuries  or  insults,  the  con¬ 
ciliating  of  favour,  the  discovery  and  punishment 
of  the  thief  or  the  adulterer,  and  the  prediction  of 
future  events.  The  trade  which  these  imposters 
carry  on  is  extremely  lucrative;  they  manufacture 
and  sell  their  Obies  adapted  to  different  cases,  and 
at  different  prices.  A  veil  of  mystery  is  studiously 
thrown  over  their  incantations,  to  which  the  mid¬ 
night  hours  are  allotted,  and  every  precaution  is 
taken  to  conceal  them  from  the  knowledge  and  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  white  people.  The  deluded  negroes, 
who  thoroughly  believe  in  their  supernatural  pow¬ 
er,  become  the  willing  accomplices  in  this  conceal¬ 
ment,  and  the  stoutest  among  them  tremble  at  the 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  293 

very  sight  of  the  ragged  bundle,'  the  bottle,  or  the 
egg-shells,  which  are  stuck  in  the  thatch,  or  hung 
over  the  door  of  a  hut,  or  upon  the  branch  of  a 
plantain  tree,  to  deter  marauders.  In  cases  of 
poison,  the  natural  effects  of  it  are  by  the  ignorant 
negroes,  ascribed  entirely  to  the  potent  workings 
of  Obi.  The  wiser  negroes  hesitate  to  reveal  their 
suspicions,  through  a  dread  of  incurring  the  terri¬ 
ble  vengeance  which  is  fulminated  by  the  Obeah- 
men  against  any  who  should  betray  them:  it  is  very 
difficult,  therefore,  for  the  white  proprietor,  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  Obeak  professor  from  any  other  negro 
upon  his  plantation;  and  so  infatuated  are  the 
blacks  in  general,  that  but  few  instances  occur  of 
their  having  assumed  courage  enough  to  impeach 
these  miscreants.  With  minds  so  firmly  prepos¬ 
sessed,  they  no  sooner  find  Obi  set  for  them  near 
the  door  of  their  house,  or  in  the  path  which  leads 
to  it,  than  they  give  themselves  up  for  lost.  When 
a  negro  is  robbed  of  a  fowl  or  a  hog,  he  applies  di¬ 
rectly  to  the  Obeah  man  or  woman ;  it  is  then  made 
known  among  his  fellow  blacks,  that  Obi  is  set  for 
the  thief;  and  as  soon  as  the  latter  hears  the  dread¬ 
ful  news,  his  terrified  imagination  begins  to  work, 
no  resource  is  left  but  in  the  superior  skill  of  some 
more  eminent  Obeah-man  of  the  neighbourhood, 
who  may  counteract  the  magical  operations  of 
the  other;  but  if  no  one  can  be  found  of  higher 
rank  and  ability,  or  if,  after  gaining  such  an  ally, 
he  should  still  fancy  himself  affected,  he  presently 
falls  into  a  decline,  under  the  incessant  horror  of 
impending  calamities.  The  slightest  painful  sensa- 


300 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it. 

tion  in  the  head,  the  bowels,  or  any  other  part,  any 
casual  loss  or  hurt,  confirms  his  apprehensions,  and 
he  believes  himself  the  devoted  victim  of  an  invisi¬ 
ble  and  irresistible  agency.  Sleep,  appetite,  and 
cheerfulness  forsake  him,  his  strength  decays,  his 
disturbed  imagination  is  haunted  without  respite, 
his  features  wear  the  settled  gloom  of  desponden¬ 
cy:  dirt,  or  any  other  unwholsome  substance,  be¬ 
come  his  only  food,  he  contracts  a  morbid  habit  of 
body,  and  gradually  sinks  into  the  grave.  A  negro, 
who  is  taken  ill,  inquires  of  the  Obeah-man  the 
cause  of  his  sickness,  whether  it  will  prove  mortal 
or  not,  and  within  what  time  he  shall  die  or  re¬ 
cover?  The  oracle  generally  ascribes  the  distemper 
to  the  malice  of  some  particular  person  by  name,, 
and  advises  to  set  Obi  for  thgt  person;  but  if  no 
hopes  are  given  of  recovery,  immediate  despair 
takes  place,  which  no  medicine  can  remove,  and 
death  is  the  certain  consequence.  Those  anoma¬ 
lous  symptoms,  which  originate  from  causes  deeply 
rooted  m  the  mind,  such  as  the  terrors  of  Obi>  or 
from  poisons,  whose  operation  is  slow  and  intricate, 
will  baffle  the  skill  of  the  ablest  physician. 

<c  Considering  the  multitude  of  occasions  which 
may  provoke  the  negroes  to  exercise  the  powers  of 
Obi  against  each  other,  and  the  astonishing  influ¬ 
ence  of  this  superstition  upon  their  minds,  we  can¬ 
not  but  attribute  a  very  considerable  portion  of  the 
annual  mortality  among  the  negroes  of  Jamaica  to 
this  fascinating  mischief. 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  301 

“  The  Obi  is  usually  composed  of  a  farrago  of 
ec  materials,  most  of  which  are  enumerated  in  the 
«  Jamaica  law,*  viz.  blood,  feathers,  parrots  beaks, 
“  dogs  teeth,  alligators  teeth,  broken  bottles,  grave 
fe  dirt,  rum,  and  egg-shells.” 

With  a  view  to  illustrate  the  description  we 
have  given  of  this  practice,  and  its  common  ef¬ 
fects,  we  have  subjoined  a  few  examples  out  of 
the  very  great  number  which  have  occurred  in  Ja¬ 
maica;  not  that  they  are  peculiar  to  that  island  on¬ 
ly,  for  we  believe  similar  examples  may  be  found 
in  other  West  India  colonies.  Pere  Labat ,  in  his 
history  of  Martinico,  has  mentioned  some  which 
are  very  remarkable. f 

“  It  may  seem  extraordinary,  that  a  practice  al¬ 
leged  to  be  so  frequent  in  Jamaica  should  not  have 
received  an  earlier  check  from  the  legislature.  The 
truth  is,  that  the  skill  of  some  negroes',  in  the  art 
of  poisoning,  has  been  noticed  ever  since  the  co¬ 
lonists  became  much  acquainted  with  them.  Sloane 
and  Barham,  who  practised  physic  in  Jamaica  in 
the  last  century,  have  mentioned  particular  instan¬ 
ces  of  it.  The  secret  and  insidious  manner  in 
which  this  crime  is  generally  perpetrated,  makes 
*  the  legal  proof  of  it  extremely  difficult  Suspici¬ 
ons  therefore  have  been  frequent,  but  detections 
rare:  these  murderers  have  sometimes  been  brought 


*  Passed  1760. 

f  Tome  ii.  p,  59.  447.  499.  506., 


jo2  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

to  justice,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  a  far 
greater  number  have  escaped  with  impunity.  In 
regard  to  the  other  and  more  common  tricks  of  Obi , 
such  as  hanging  up  feathers,  bottles,  egg-shells,  &c. 
&c.  in  order  to  intimidate  negroes  of  a  thievish  dis¬ 
position  from  plundering  huts,  hog-styes,  or  provi¬ 
sion  grounds,  these  were  laughed  at  by  the  white 
inhabitants  as  harmless  stratagems,  contrived  by  the 
more  sagacious,  for  deterring  the  more  simple  and 
superstitious  blacks,  and  serving  for  much  the  same 
purpose,  as  the  scare-crows  which  are  in  general 
used  among  our  English  farmers  and  gardeners. 
But  in  the  year  1760,  when  a  very  formidable  in¬ 
surrection  of  the  Koromantyn  or  Gold  coast  ne¬ 
groes  broke  out  in  the  parish  of  St.  Mary,  ana 
spread  through  almost  every  other  district  of  the 
island,  an  old  Koromantyn  negro,  the  chief  instiga¬ 
tor  and  oracle  of  the  insurgents  in  that  parish,  who 
had  administered  the  fetish  or  solemn  oath  to  the 
conspirators,  and  furnished  them  with  a  magical 
preparation  which  was  to  render  them  invulnerable, 
was  fortunately  apprehended,  convicted,  and  hung 
up  with  all  his  feathers  and  trumperies  about  him; 
and  his  execution  struck  the  insurgents  with  a  ge¬ 
neral  panic,  from  which  they  never  afterwards  re¬ 
covered.  The  examinations  which  were  taken  at 
that  period,  first  opened  the  eyes  of  the  public  to 
the  very  dangerous  tendency  of  the  Obeah  practi¬ 
ces,  and  gave  birth  to  the  law  which  was  then  enact¬ 
ed  for  their  suppression  and  punishment.  But, 
neither  the  terror  of  this  law,  the  strict  investiga¬ 
tion  which  has  ever  since  been  made  after  the  pro- 


303 


chap,  in.]  WEST  INDIES. 

lessors  of  Obi,  nor  the  many  examples  of  those  who 
from  time  to  time  have  been  hanged  or  transported, 
have  hitherto  produced  the  desired  effect.  We  con¬ 
clude,  therefore,  that  either  this  sect,  like  others 
in  the  world,  has  flourished  under  persecution;  or, 
that  fresh  supplies  are  annually  introduced  from 
the  African  seminaries. 


The  following  is  the  paper  referred  to  in  the 
preceding  account. 

OBEAH  PRACTICE. 

WE  have  the  following  narratives  from  a  plant¬ 
er  in  Jamaica,  a  gentleman  of  the  strictest  veracity 
who  is  now  in  London,  and  ready  to  attest  the  truth 
of  them. 

c<  Upon  returning  to  Jamaica  in  the  year  1775,  he 
found  that  a  great  many  of  his  negroes  had  died 
during  his  absence;  and  that  of  such  as  remained 
alive,  at  least  one-half  were  debilitated,  bloated, 
and  in  a  very  deplorable  condition.  The  mortality 
continued  after  his  arrival,  and  two  or  three  were 
frequently  buried  in  one  day;  others  were  taken 
ill,  and  began  to  decline  under  the  same  symptoms. 
Every  means  were  tried  by  medicines,  and  the 
most  careful  nursing,  to  preserve  the  lives  of  the 
feeblest;  but  in  spite  of  all  his  endeavours,  this  de- 


i 


304  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

population  went  on  for  above  a  twelvemonth 
longer,  with  more  or  less  intermission,  and  with¬ 
out  his  being  able  to  ascertain  the  real  cause, 
though  the  Obeah  practice  was  strongly  suspected, 
as  well  by  himself,  as  by  the  doctor,  and  other 
white  persons  upon  the  plantation,  as  it  was  known 
to  have  been  very  common  in  that  part  of  the 
island,  and  particularly  among  the  negroes  of  the 
Papaw  or  Popo  country.  Still  he  was  unable  to 
verify  his  suspicions,  because  the  patients  con¬ 
stantly  denied  their  having  any  thing  to  do  with 
persons  of  that  order,  or  any  knowledge  of  them. 
At  length  a  negress,  who  had  been  ill  for  some 
time,  came  one  day,  and  informed  him,  that  feeling 
it  was  impossible  for  her  to  live  much  longer,  she 
thought  herself  bound  in  duty,  before  she  died,  to 
impart  a  very  great  secret,  and  acquaint  him  with 
the  true  cause  of  her  disorder,  in  hopes  that  the 
disclosure  might  prove  the  means  of  stopping  that 
mischief,  which  had  already  swept  away  such  a 
number  of  her  fellow-slaves.  She  proceeded  to  say, 
that  her  step-mother  (a  woman  of  the  Popo  coun¬ 
try,  above  eighty  years  old,  but  still  hale  and  active) 
had  put  Obi  upon  her,  as  she  had  also  done  upon 
those  who  had  lately  died ;  and  that  the  old  woman 
had  practised  Obi  for  as  many  years  past  as  she 
could  remember. 

cc  The  other  negroes  of  the  plantation  no  sooner 
heard  of  this  impeachment,  than  they  ran  in  a  body 
to  their  master,  and  confirmed  the  truth  of  it,  ad¬ 
ding,  that  she  had  carried  on  this  business  ever 


chap,  hi.]  WEST  INDIES.  305 

since  her  arrival  from  Africa,  and  was  the  terror  of 
the  whole  neighbourhood. — Upon  this  he  repaired 
directly,  with  six  white  servants,  to  the  old  wo¬ 
man’s  house,  and  forcing  open  the  door,  observed 
the  whole  inside  of  the  roof  (which  was  of  thatch), 
and  every  crevice  of  the  walls,  stuck  with  the  im¬ 
plements  of  her  trade,  consisting  of  rags,  feathers, 
bones  of  cats,  and  a  thousand  other  articles.  Exa¬ 
mining  further,  a  large  earthern  pot  or  jar,  close 
covered,  was  found  concealed  under  her  bed. — It 
contained  a  prodigious  quantity  of  round  bails  of 
earth  or  clay  of  various  dimensions,  large  and  small, 
whitened  on  the  outside,  and  variously  compounded, 
some  with  hair  and  rags,  or  feathers  of  all  sorts,  and 
strongly  bounded  with  twine;  others  blended  with 
the  upper  section  of  the  skulls  of  cats,  or  stuck 
round  with  cats  teeth  and  claws,  or  with  human  or 
dogs  teeth,  and  some  glass  beads  of  different  co¬ 
lours;  there  were  also,  a  great  many  egg-shells  filled 
with  a  viscous  or  gummy  substance,  the  qualities 
of  which  he  neglected  to  examine,  and  many  little 
bags  stuffed  with  a  variety  of  articles,  the  particu¬ 
lars  of  which  cannot  at  this  distance  of  time  be  re¬ 
collected.  The  house  was  instantly  pulled  down, 
and  with  the  whole  of  its  contents  committed  to 
the  flames,  amidst  the  general  acclamations  of  all 
his  other  negroes.  In  regard  to  the  old  woman, 
he  declined  bringing  her  to  trial  under  the  law  of 
the  island,  which  would  have  punished  her  with 
death ;  but,  from  a  principle  of  humanity,  deli¬ 
vered  her  into  the  hands  of  a  party  of  Spaniards, 
wht*>,  (as  she  was  thought  not  incapable  of  doing 

Vol  .  If.  q  q 


3o6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  it, 

some  trifling  kind  of  work),  were  very  glad  to  ac¬ 
cept  and  carry  her  with  them  to  Cuba.  From  the 
moment  of  her  departure,  his  negroes  seemed  all 
to  be  animated  with  new  spirits,  and  the  mala¬ 
dy  spread  no  farther  among  them.  The  total  of  his 
losses  in  the  course  of  about  fifteen  years  prece¬ 
ding  the  discovery,  and  imputable  solely  to  the 
Obeah  practice ,  he  estimates  at  least  at  one  hun¬ 
dred  negroes.” 


OBEAII  TRIALS. 

“  Havinsr  received  some  further  information' 

O 

upon  this  subject  from  another  Jamaica  gentle¬ 
man,  who  sat  upon  two  trials,  we  beg  leave  to  de¬ 
liver  the  same  in  his  own  woids,  as  a  supplement 
to  what  we  have  already  had  the  honour  of  sub¬ 
mitting. 

“  In  the  year  1760,  the  influence  of  the  profes¬ 
sors  of  the  Obeah  art  was  such,  as  to  induce  a 
great  many  of  the  negro  slaves  in  Jamaica  to  en¬ 
gage  in  the  rebellion  which  happened  in  that  year, 
and  which  gave  rise  to  the  law  which  was  then 
made  against  the  practice  of  Obi. 

“  Assurance  was  given  to  these  deluded  people, 
that  they  were  to  become  invulnerable ;  and  irrbr- 


chap,  nr.]  WEST  INDIES.  307 

der  to  render  them  so,  the  Obeah-men  furnished 
them  with  a  powder,  with  which  they  were  to  rub 
themselves. 

«  In  the  first  engagement  with  the  rebels,  nine 
of  them  were  k  ded,  and  many  prisoners  taken; 
amongst  the  latter  was  one  very  intelligent  fellow, 
who  offered  to  disclose  many  important  matters,  on 
condition  that  his  life  should  be  spared;  which  was 
promised.  He  then  related  the  active  part  which 
the  negroes,  known  among  them  by  the  name  of 
Obeah-men,  had  taken  in  propagating  the  insurrec¬ 
tion;  one  of  whom  was  thereupon  apprehended, 
tried,  [for  rebellious  conspiracy),  convicted,  and  sen¬ 
tenced  to  death. 

N.  B.  This  was  the  Koromantyn  Obeah-man 
alluded  to  in  our  first  paper. 

«  At  the  place  of  execution,  he  bid  defiance  to 
the  executioner,  telling  him,  that  it  was  not  in  the 
power  of  the  white  people  to  kill  him.”  And  the 
negroes  (spectators)  were  greatly  perplexed  when 
they  saw  him  expire.  Upon  other  Obeah-men,  who 
were  apprehended  at  that  time,  various  experiments 
were  made  with  electrical  machines  and  magic  lan¬ 
terns,  but  with  very  little  effect,  except  on  one,  who, 
after  receiving  some  very  severe  shocks,  acknow¬ 
ledged  that  his  master’s  Obi  exceeded  his  own. 

“  The  gentleman  from  whom  we  have  this  ac¬ 
count,  remembers  having  sat  twice  on  trials  of 


3o8  HISTORY  OF  THE  [boor  iv. 

Obeah-meUy  who  were  both  convicted  of  selling 
their  Obeah  preparations ,  which  had  occasioned 
the  death  of  the  parties  to  whom  they  had  been 
administered;  notwithstanding  which,  the  lenity  of 
their  judges  prevailed  so  far,  that  they  were  only 
punished  with  transportation.  To  prove  the  fact, 
two  witnesses  were  deemed  necessary,  with  cor¬ 
roborating  circumstances/’ 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 


30  9 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Means  of  obtaining  slaves  in  Africa. — Observations  there¬ 
on. — Objections  to  a  direct  and  immediate  abolition  of 
the  trade  by  the  British  nation  only. — The  probable 
consequences  of  such  a  measure,  both  in  Africa  and 
the  West  Indies ,  considered. — Disproportions  of  sexes 
in  the  number  of  slaves  annually  exported  from  Africa. 

. — (  auses  thereof. — Mode  of  transporting  negroes  to  the 
West  Indies,  and  regulations  recently  established  by 

act  of  parliament. — Effect  of  those  regulations. 

\ 

IT  hath  been  observed  in  a  former  chapter,  that 
no  certain  and  precise  account  is  easily  to  be  ob¬ 
tained,  of  the  means  by  which  the  market  for  slaves 
is  annually  kept  up  and  supported  in  Africa.  The 
several  instances  that  are  given  of  slavery  arising 
from  captivity  in  war,  delinquency  and  debt,  seem 
inadequate  to  so  regular  and  abundant  a  supply.  It 
is  difficult  to  imagine,  that  casual  contributions  of 
this  kind  can  possibly  furnish  an  annual  export  of 


310  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

74,000.*  Having  an  opportunity,  a  few  years  ago, 
of  consulting  a  very  intelligent  person  on  this  point, 
who  had  visited  many  parts  of  the  coast,  and  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  a  man  of  veracity  and  candour,  I  recei¬ 
ved  from  him,  in  writing,  an  answer  which  I  shall 
present  to  my  readers  verbatim;  and  subjoin  such 
further  information  as  I  have  been  able  to  collect. 
The  answer  which  I  received,  was  given  in  the 
words  following  : — “  In  all  parts  of  the  coast,  and  I 
apprehend  it  to  be  the  same  inland,  the  body  of 
the  people  are  in  a  state  of  absolute  and  unlimited 
slavery  3  their  children  are  born  to  no  other  inhe¬ 
ritance,  and  are  liable  to  be  sold  by  their  owners 
as  they  think  proper.  Most  parts  of  the  coast 
differ  in  their  governments;  some  are  absolute 
monarchies,  while  others  draw  near  to  an  aristocra¬ 
cy.  In  both,  the  authority  of  the  chief  or  chiefs 
is  unlimited,  extending  to  life,  and  it  is  exercised 
as  often  as  criminal  cases  require,  unless  death  is 
commuted  into  slavery;  in  which  case  the  offender 
is  sold,  and  if  the  shipping  will  not  buy  the  crimi¬ 
nal,  he  is  immediately  put  to  death.  Fathers  of 

*  Besides  which,  great  numbers  are  supplied  from  the  nations  bor¬ 
dering  on  the  rivers  of  Senegal  and  Gambia,  for  the  emperor  of  Mo. 
rocco  and  the  states  of  Barbary.  Caravans  also  travel  from  thence  across 
the  continent  to  Upper  Egypt  with  considerable  supplies  of  negroes, 
some  of  which  are  sent  afterwards  to  Constantinople.  A  very  curi¬ 
ous  and  interesting  account  of  this  traffic  is  given  in  the  report  of  the 
lords  of  the  privy  council.  Great  numbers  of  slaves  are  likewise 
sent  from  Mozambique,  and  the  ports  on  the  eastern  coast,  to  Persia, 
Goa,  and  other  parts  of  the  East  Indies.  Hence  it  has  been  calcu¬ 
lated  that  Africa  is  drained  annually  of  not  less  than  150,000  of  its 
natives. 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  IV.] 


311 


free  condition  have  power  to  sell  their  children, 
but  this  power  is  but  very  seldom  enforced.  I  ne¬ 
ver  knew  an  instance  of  it  but  once,  and  then  the 
father  was  so  execrated  by  his  neighbours,  for  the 
act  of  selling  a  son  and  daughter,  that  he  shortly 
afterwards  fell  into  a  state  of  despondency  and  died. 
The  family  was  of  some  distinction,  and  the  soil 
and  daughter  were  bought  by  a  friendly  captain, 
who  I  know  afterwards  gave  freedom  to  one  of 
them,  and  I  believe  he  gave  it  to  both.  I  never 
knew  another  instance  of  this  kind,  nor  do  I  be¬ 
lieve  there  is  one  slave  in  a  thousand  procured  in 
this  way.  Neither  do  I  imagine  there  are  many 
procured  by  wars  or  intestine  broils.  The  truth  is, 
the  bulk  of  the  people  are  born  slaves  to  great 
men,  reared  as  such,  held  as  property,  and  as  pro¬ 
perty  sold.  There  are,  indeed,  many  circumstances 
by  which  a  free  man  may  become  a  slave :  such  as 
being  in  debt,  and  not  able  to  pay ;  and  in  some 
of  such  cases,  if  the  debt  be  large,  not  only  the 
debtor,  but  his  family  likewise,  become  the  slaves 
of  his  creditors,  and  may  be  sold.  Adultery  is 
commonly  punished  in  the  same  manner;  both  the 
offending  parties  being  sold,  and  the  purchase  mo¬ 
ney  paid  to  the  injured  husband.  Obi,  or  pretend¬ 
ed  witchcraft  (in  which  all  the  negroes  firmly  be¬ 
lieve,  and  it  is  generally  accompanied  with  the 
crime  of  poisoning)  is  another,  and  a  very  common 
offence,  for  which  slavery  is  adjudged  the  lawful 
punishment;  and  it  extends  to  all  the  family  of  the 
offender.  Thpre  are  various  other  crimes  which 
subject  the  offender  and  his  children  to  be  sold; 
and  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  if  there  were  no 


312 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

buyers,  the  poor  wretches  would  be  murdered 
without  mercy.” 

Such  is  the  account  which  I  received,  and  it  is 
confirmed  by  several  of  the  witnesses  that  were 
examined  by  the  committee  of  the  privy  council, 
and  by  others  that  appeared  before  the  house  of 
commons;  but  it  is  contradicted  in  some  material 
circumstances  by  other  gentlemen,  whose  exami¬ 
nations  were  taken  at  the  same  time,  and  to  whose 
authority  much  respect  is  due.  Mr.  Penny  asserts, 
that  although  three  fourths  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
windward  coast  are  slaves  to  the  other  fourth,  yet, 
that  these  local  and  domestic  slaves  are  never  sold, 
unless  for  crimes.  He  is  of  opinion,  that  in  no  coun¬ 
try,  either  in  the  maritime  districts  or  in  the  interi¬ 
or  parts  of  Africa,  are  slaves  bred  for  sale,  but  that 
most  of  those  which  are  disposed  of  to  the  Europe¬ 
ans,  are  sold  in  consequence  of  delinquency,  or 
captivity  in  war.  The  same,  or  nearly  the  same, 
account  is  given  of  the  Fantyn  nation  by  Mr.  Nor¬ 
ris;  who  observes,  that  <c  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  community  are  persons  born  slaves,  but  that 
these  have  peculiar  privileges,  and  enjoy  many  ad¬ 
vantages,  which  the  slaves  of  the  neighbouring 
countries  do  not,  and  cannot  be  sold  at  the  caprice 
of  their  masters.”  His  opinion  is,  that  the  num¬ 
ber  of  slaves  furnished  in  the  Fantyn  country  (about 
2000  annually)  is  made  up  by  delinquency  and 
debt.* 

*  Several  other  witnesses  speak  of  the  privileges  which  attach  to 
domestic  slaves  in  Africa,  but  it  is  observable  that  many  of  these  ad- 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  313 

Under  such  contradictory  information,  it  occurred 
to  me,  during  my  residence  in  Jamaica,  to  exa¬ 
mine  many  of  the  negroes  themselves.  I  mean 
negroes  newly  arrived  from  Africa-  for  from  those 
who  have  resided  any  length  of  time  in  the  West 
Indies,  it  is  difficult  to  obtain,  even  to  inquiries  of 
an  indifferent  nature,  such  answers  as  carry  with 
them  conviction  of  their  truth.  It  is  seldom,  for  iff 
stance,  that  any  Guinea  negro  will  acknowledge  that 
he  was  in  a  state  of  slavery  in  his  native  country. 
Observing  the  respect  and  pre-eminence  allowed 
to  wealth  and  consequence  among  the  whites,  and 
the  privileges  which  attach  to  freedom  in  the  West 
Indies  among  those  of  his  own  colour,  who  are 
born  or  rendered  free,  he  is  tempted,  whether  just¬ 
ly  or  not,  to  assert  his  claim  to  some  degree  of  con¬ 
sideration  from  his  past,  if  not  from  his  present 
condition ;  and  it  is  a  natural  and  excusable  propen¬ 
sity.  Conceiving  therefore  that  the  truth  might  be 
best  obtained  from  negroes  recently  imported,  I 
inquired  of  many  young  people,  from  different 
parts  of  Africa,  concerning  the  circumstances  of 
their  captivity  and  sale,  and,  having  reduced  their 
Information  to  writing,  I  interrogated  many  of 
them  again  on  the  same  subject,  after  an  interval 
of  several  months.  If  the  same  account  was  given 

in  it,  and  not  one  I  believe  denies,  that  the  African  master  has  the 
power  of  putting  such  slaves  to  death,  with  impunity,  whenevet  he 
thinks  proper  ;  and  it  will  presently  be  shewn  from  the  testimony  ot 
some  of  the  negroes  themselves,  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  the 
master  cannot  sell  them  at  pleasure, 

Vol.  II. 


r  r 


3H  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it. 

precisely  by  the  same  people  a  second  time,  I 
commonly  considered  it  as  grounded  in  truth.  On 
other  occasions  I  have  examined  brothers  and  sis¬ 
ters  apart.  If  their  information  agreed  in  minute 
particulars,  I  could  have  no  reason  to  suspect  them 
of  falsehood.  Of  five  and  twenty  young  persons 
of  both  sexes  whom  I  thus  interrogated,  fifteen 
frankly  declared  that  they  were  born  to  slavery, 
and  were  either  sold  to  pay  the  debts,  or  bartered 
away  to  supply  the  wants  of  their  owners.  Five 
were  secretly  kidnapped  in  the  interior  country, 
and  sold  to  black  merchants,  who  conveyed  them 
from  an  immense  distance  to  the  sea  coast,  and 
sold  them  to  the  ship  masters  that  brought  them  to 
Jamaica.  The  other  five  appeared  to  have  fallen 
victims  in  some  of  those  petty  wars,  which  it  is  pro¬ 
bable,  rapacity  and  revenge  reciprocally  instigate 
throughout  the  whole  continent  of  Africa.*  On 

'*  Perhaps  the  reader  will  not  be  displeased  to  be  presented  with  a 
few  of  these  examinations,  as  they  were  taken  down  at  the  time,  and 
without  any  view  to  publication. 

Adam,  (a  Congo),  a  boy  as  I  guess  about  fourteen,  his  country  name 
Sarri ,  came  from  a  vast  distance  inland,  was  waylaid  and  stole,  in  the 
path  about  three  miles  from  his  own  village,  by  one  of  his  country¬ 
men.  It  was  early  in  the  morning,  and  the  man  hid  him  all  day  in  the 
woods,  and  marched  him  in  the  night.  He  was  conducted  in  this 
manner  for  a  month,  and  then  sold  to  another  black  man  for  a  gun, 
some  powder  and  shot,  and  a  quantity  of  salt.  He  was  sold  a  second 
time  for  a  keg  of  brandy.  His  last  mentioned  purchaser  bought  seve¬ 
ral  other  boys  in  the  same  manner,  and  when  he  had  collected  twenty, 
sent  them  down  to  the  sea  coast,  where  they  were  sold  to  a  captain  of 
a  ship.  He  relates  further,  that  his  father,  Scindia  Siuante,  was  a  chief 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  315 

such  occasions,  the  young  and  the  able  are  carried 
into  captivity  by  the  victors,  and  the  aged  and  in¬ 
firm  commonly  murdered  on  the  spot.  By  these 
means,  and  the  commutation  of  death  into  slavery 
for  crimes  real  and  pretended,  are  the  nations  of  Eu¬ 
rope  supplied ;  and  it  cannot  surely  be  a  question, 
amongst  a  humane  and  enlightened  people,  con¬ 
cerning  the  injustice  of  a  traffic  thus  supported. 
To  attempt  its  defence  in  all  cases,  were  to  offer 
an  insult  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind,  and  an 
outrage  on  the  best  feelings  of  our  nature.  Yet  a 

or  captain  under  the  king,  and  a  great  warrior,  and  had  taken  many 
people,  whom  he  sold  as  slaves. 

S^ua^iv  and  Quamina  (hroihers)  from  the  Gold  coast,  one  of  them, 
as  I  guess,  about  twenty  years  old,  the  other  eighteen,  were  born 
slaves  to  a  man  named  Banafou,  who  had  a  great  many  other  slaves, 
and  sold  these  two  to  the  captain  that  brought  them  to  Jamaica.  On 
being  asked  for  what  cause  their  master  sold  them,  they  supposed  the 
question  implied  a  charge  against  them  of  misconduct,  and  one  or 
them  replied  with  great  quickness,  that  they  were  not  the  only  slaves 
that  were  sold  in  Guinea  without  having  been  guilty  of  any  crime; 
their  master,  they  said,  owed  money,  and  sold  them  to  pay  his  debts. 

Afiba,  a  Gold  coast  girl,  aged  about  fifteen,  was  a  slave  to  a  man 
named  ^ uamina  Tati.  Her  master  sold  her  and  two  others  to  the 
same  captain,  for  a  quantity  of  linen  and  other  goods. 

Tamousa ,  a  Cbatnba  youth,  about  sixteen,  was  a  slave  to  a  peison 
named  Soubadou ;  who  sold  him,  together  with  a  a  cow,  for  a  gur)j  a 
quantity  of  other  goods,  and  some  brandy. 

Oliver,  from  Assiante—hh  country  name  Sang —a  young  man,  as  I 
guess,  about  twenty-two  or  twenty-three  years  of  age.  His  father 
was  a  free  man,  a  carpenter— lived  in  a  village  far  from  the  sea.  Th. 


316  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

good  mind  may  honestly  derive  some  degree  of 
consolation,  in  considering  that  all  such  of  the 
wretched  victims  as  were  slaves  in  Africa,  are,  by 
being  sold  to  the  whites,  removed  to  a  situation  in¬ 
finitely  more  desirable,  even  in  its  worst  state,  than 
that  of  the  best  and  most  favoured  slaves  in  their 
native  country.  It  is,  on  all  hands,  admitted  that 
the  condition  of  those  poor  people,  under  their  own 
governments,  is  the  most  deplorable  that  we  can 
conceive  a  human  creature  to  be  subject  to.  They 
have  no  security  for  property,  nor  protection  for 
their  persons  3  they  exist  at  the  will  and  caprice  of 

village  was  attacked  by  a  party  of  Fantees,  who  came  in  the  nighg 
and  set  fire  to  the  houses,  and  killed  most  of  the  inhabitants  with  guns 
and  cutlasses— -particularly  the  old.  The  young  people  they  took  pri¬ 
soners,  and  afterwards  sold  him  and  two  others,  for  a  piece  of  gold 
called  ska,  to  a  black  merchant  who  carried  them  to  the  Fantee  coun¬ 
try.— He  was  afterwards  sold  or  transferred  over  to  six  different  black 
purchasers;  the  last  of  whom  carried  him  down  to  the  sea  coast,  and 
sold  him  on  board  a  ship. — Was  much  frightened  at  the  sight  of 
white  men,  and  thought  he  was  to  be  eaten. 

Esther  relates  that  she  was  born  in  the  Ebo  country,  about  one  day’s 
journey  from  the  sea  coast,  where  her  grandmother  lived,  to  whom 
she  was  sent  on  a  visit  by  her  father.  While  there,  the  village  was 
attacked  by  a  body  of  negroes  (she  knows  not  of  what  country,  nor 
on  what  account)  on  whose  approach  she  and  all  the  women  were  sent 
into  the  woods,  where  a  party  of  the  enemy  found  them,  and  carried 
away  all  such  as  were  able  to  travel.  The  old,  and  those  who  were 
averse  to  remove,  were  put  to  death;  her  grandmother  among  the  rest. 
The  third  day  she  was  sold  to  the  white  people.  She  has  many  marks 
about  the  chest,  which  she  appeals  to  as  a  proof  of  free  birth,  and  as¬ 
serts  that  her  father  had  a  plantation  of  corn,  yams,  and  tobacco,  and 
possessed  many  slaves, 


I 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  317 

a  master,  who  is  not  amenable  to  any  law  for  his 
ill  treatment  of  them,  and  who  may  slaughter  them 
at  his  pleasure,  Ele  has  in  truth  but  very  little  in¬ 
terest  in  their  preservation,  having  no  means  of 
employing  them  in  profitable  labour,  and  when 
provisions  are  scarce,  he  has  even  strong  induce¬ 
ment  to  destroy  them. 

The  chief  objection  to  the  slave  trade  arises  from 
the  great  encouragement  which,  I  fear,  it  unavoid¬ 
ably  holds  forth  to  acts  of  violence,  oppression  and 
fraud,  among  the  natives  towards  each  other. 
Without  doubt,  this  is  the  strong  part  of  the  pe¬ 
titioners  case  ^  and  I  admit  it  to  be  so,  with  that 
frankness  which  I  trust  no  honest  West  Indian 
will  condemn.  At  the  same  time  it  deserves  very 
serious  consideration,  whether  a  direct  and  imme¬ 
diate  discontinuance  of  the  i^ade  by  the  British  na¬ 
tion  only  (the  other  nations  of  Europe  continuing  to 
purchase  as  usual)  would  afford  a  remedy  to  those 
miseries,  the  existence  of  which  every  enlightened 
mind  cannot  but  admit,  and  every  good  mind  must 
deplore ;  or  rather,  whether  a  partial  and  sudden 
abolition  (so  inveterate  is  the  evil)  would  not  ag¬ 
gravate  them  in  a  high  degree. 

In  considering  this  question,  we  must  have  in 
view  not  only  the  circumstances  attending  the 
slave  trade  on  the  coast,  but  also  the  situation  of 
the  enslaved  negroes  already  in  the  Sugar  colonies. 
On  the  first  head  it  is  to  be  inquired,  whether,  sup¬ 
posing  Great  Britain  should  abandon  her  share  in 


3 IS  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

this  commerce,  a  less  number  of  slaves  would  in 
consequence  thereof  be  brought  down  for  sale  in 
Africa?  Admiral  Edwards,  who  served  on  the  sta¬ 
tion,  and  was  on  shore  seven  months  at  a  time,  is 
decidedly  of  opinion  that,  so  long  as  other  nations 
continue  to  purchase,  the  number  would  not  be 
diminished  in  the  least  A  and  a  little  reflection  may 
perhaps  convince  us,  that  his  opinion  is  founded  in 
reason,  and  the  nature  of  the  case.  Among  the 
commercial  nations  of  Europe,  it  is  true,  that  in 
most  cases  of  purchase  and  barter,  the  demand  and 
the  supply  grow  up  together  and  continue  to  regu¬ 
late  and  support  each  other:  but  these  are  the  ar¬ 
rangements  of  well-informed  and  civilized  men.  In 
Africa,  it  is  apprehended,  the  slave  merchants  pos¬ 
sess  no  ideas  of  this  kind,  neither  does  the  na¬ 
ture  of  their  traffic  allow  of  such  regulations.  When 
two  African  states  are*  at  war  with  each  other,  the 
aim  of  each  undoubtedly  is  to  destroy  as  many  ene¬ 
mies,  or  seize  on  as  great  a  number  of  captives  as 
possible.  Of  these  last  unfortunate  victims,  all 
such  as  are  able  to  travel,  are  commonly  sent  down 
to  the  coast  for  sale,  the  rest  are  massacred  on  the 
spot,  and  the  same  fate  attends  those  unhappy 
wretches  who,  being  sent  down,  are  found  un¬ 
saleable.  The  prices  indeed  on  the  coast  have 
been  known  to  vary  as  the  market  is  more  or 
less  plentifully  supplied;  but  so  long  as  ships  from 
Europe  create  a  market,  whether  the  prices  be 

*  See  his  evidence  in  the  report  of  the  Committee  of  Privy  Council, 
3789. 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  319 

high  or  low,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted,  that  wars 
will  be  as  frequent  as  ever,  and  that  the  same  acts 
of  oppression,  violence  and  fraud,  which  are  said  to 
be  committed  by  princes  on  their  subjects,  and  by 
individuals  on  each  other,  for  the  purpose  of  pro¬ 
curing  slaves  for  sale,  will  exist  as  usual,  without 
regulation  or  restraint. 

Behold  then  an  excess  of  38,000  of  these  misera¬ 
ble  people  (the  present  annual  export  in  British 
shipping)  thrown  upon  the  market,  and  it  is  surely 
more  than  probable  that,  one  or  the  other  of  these 
consequences  will  follow;  either  the  French,  the 
Dutch  and  the  other  maritime  nations  of  Europe, 
by  seizing  on  what  we  surrender,  will  increase 
their  trade  in  proportion  to  the  increased  supply,* 
or,  having  the  choice  and  refusal  of  38,000  more  than 
they  have  at  present,  will  become  more  difficult  to 
please;  confining  their  purchases  to  such  only  as 
are  called  prime  slaves.  Thus  the  old,  and  the  very 
young,  the  sickly  and  the  feeble,  will  be  scorn¬ 
fully  rejected ;  and  perhaps  twenty  poor  wretches 
be  considered  as  unsaleable  then,  and  sacrificed  ac¬ 
cordingly,  to  one  that  is  so  considered  and  sacri¬ 
ficed  now. 

*  Admiral  Edwards  being  asked,  Whether,  if  Great  Britain  were 
to  relinquish  the  trade  in  slaves,  the  number  sold  to  Europeans  would, 
in  his  opinion,  be  much  diminished  ?  replied,  Most  certainly  it  would 
not  be  diminished.  The  French  and  Dutch  would  immediately  get 
possession  of  this  trade. 


32.  o 


PII STORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

That  this  latter  supposition  is  not  a  mere  specu¬ 
lative  contingency,  is  abundantly  proved  by  many 
respectable  witnesses,  whose  examinations  were 
taken  by  the  committee  of  the  privy  council: — Be¬ 
ing  asked  concerning  the  disposal  of  such  slaves  as 
are  rejected  by  the  European  traders,  either  be¬ 
cause  their  cargoes  are  already  assorted,  or  because 
the  miserable  victims  are  considered  as  too  old  or 
too  feeble  for  labour,  it  was  given  in  evidence,  as 
a  fact  too  notorious  to  be  controverted,  that  they  are 
very  frequently,  if  not  generally,  put  to  death.  The 
slave  merchant,  not  having  the  means  of  maintain¬ 
ing  his  captives  for  any  length  of  time,  makes  no 
scruple  to  avow,  that  it  is  his  intention  io  destroy 
them  provided  they  are  not  sold  by  a  certain  day; 
and  the  work  of  death,  on  such  occasions,  is  some¬ 
times  performed  in  sight  of  our  shipping.  Shock¬ 
ing  as  this  account  may  seem,  it  is  verified  by  un¬ 
disputed  testimony ;  and  to  suppose  that  a  discon¬ 
tinuance  of  the  trade  by  one  nation  only,  will  put  an 
end  to  this  enormity,  is  to  suppose  that  the  African 
slaveholder  will  become  more  merciful,  as  his 
slaves  are  rendered  of  less  value;  a  conclusion 
which  I  am  afraid  experience  will  not  warrant.* 


*  Mr.  Newton  (an  evidence  in  support  of  the  application  to  parli¬ 
ament  for  an  abolition  of  the  trade)  admits,  that  some  of  the  slaves 
that  have  been  rejected  by  the  Europeans,  have  been  knocked  on  the 
head  with  the  paddles  of  the  boat  that  brought  them,  and  thrown 
overboard.  On  the  Gold  coast,  Mr.  Miles  supposed  they  are  most¬ 
ly  reserved  for  the  purpose  of  being  sacrificed  at  the  burial  of  great 
men.  One  instance  of  this  came  within  his  own  knowledge.-— Mr* 
Weuves  knew  an  instance  of  a  woman  being  destroyed  who  was  ac- 


321 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES. 

The  effect  which  a  partial  abolition  would  proba¬ 
bly  have  in  our  Sugar  islands  is  now  to  be  consider¬ 
ed;  and  here  it  must  in  the  first  place,  be  observed, 
that  it  seems  not  to  be  known,  or  is  not  adverted  to 
in  England,  that  the  sugar  estates  are  not  only  very 
much  understocked  in  general,  but  that  there  is 
scarce  one  of  them,  for  reasons  that  will  presently 
be  seen,  that  possesses  a  sufficient  number  of  negro 
women,  in  proportion  to  the  men.  Of  course 
there  being  fewer  pairs,  there  are  fewer  children 
born.  Thus  situated,  there  must  necessarily  hap¬ 
pen  a  decrease  on  the  whole  number  of  the  slaves, 
even  under  the  mildest  treatment,  and  enjoying  the 
greatest  plenty  of  wholesome  provisions. — Second¬ 
ly,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  most  of  the  sugar- 
estates,  having  been  settled  on  credit,  are  burthen- 
ed  with  heavy  incumbrances  to  persons  in  Great 
Britain.  Many  planters  are  under  covenants  to 

cused  of  witchcraft,  and  could  not  be  sold.  Tn  order  to  save  her  life, 
he  offered  to  give  an  anker  of  brandy  for  her;  but  her  head  was  cut 
off  before  his  messenger  arrived.  Other  instances,  similar  to  this,  are 
related  by  Mr.  Mathers  and  Mr.  Gandy.  Sir  George  Young  saved 
the  life  of  a  beautiful  boy,  about  five  years  old,  at  Sierra  Leone. 
The  child  being  too  young  to  be  an  object  of  trade,  Would  have  b<en 
thrown  into  the  river  by  the  person  thathad  him  to  sell,  but  Sir  Geor.  e, 
to  save  his  life,  offered  a  quarter  cask  ot  Madeira  wine  for  him,  which 
was  accepted — he  brought  him  to  England,  and  made  a  present  of  lnm 
to  the  marquis  of  Lansdown.— Admiral  Edwards,  Mr.  Penny,  Mr. 
Dalzel,  Mr.  Anderson,  and  others,  concur  in  the  same  account  of  the 
disposal  of  such  as  are  rejected  by  the  Europeans. 

Report  of  the  Lords  of  the  Committee  of 
Council,  1789,  part  1st. 

Vol.  II.  s  s 


I 


3  2  2 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iy. 

consign  thither  annually,  certain  specific  quantities 
of  sugar  and  rum.  The  effect  therefore  of  a  direct 
and  unqualified  abolition  would  be  this,  that  while 
the  few  persons  who  have  money  at  command, 
would  be  waiting,  and  perhaps  contriving,  oppor¬ 
tunities  to  stock  their  plantations  with  the  slaves 
of  their  distressed  and  harassed  neighbours,  the 
great  majority  of  planters  would  find  themselves  in 
a  most  cruel  and  uncomfortable  situation}  their 
estates  already  weak-handed,  deprived  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  selling  their  lands,  and  no  means  in  their 
power  of  augmenting  their  stock  of  labourers  by 
purchase}  their  creditors,  at  the  same  time,  cla¬ 
mourous  and  importunate  for  produce,  which  can 
only  be  obtained  by  great  exertions  of  labour:  in 
such  circumstances  what  are  they  to  do?  I  cannot 
better  illustrate  this  part  of  my  subject,  than  by  the 
case  of  the  Dutch  planters  of  Essequebo  and  De- 
marara:  by  an  impolitic  interdiction  of  foreign 
slave  ships  into  those  provinces,  they  have,  for 
some  time  past,  felt  all  the  effects  of  a  virtual  abo¬ 
lition  }  and  here  follows  the  account  which  they  give 
of  their  situation,  transcribed  from  a  late  memori¬ 
al  to  the  States  General:  It  is  impossible  (say  the 
petitioners)  to  inform  your  high  mightinesses  of  the 
real  annual  diminution  of  our  slaves,  but  It  is  ge¬ 
nerally  calculated  at  five  in  the  hundred,  or  a  twen¬ 
tieth  part.  This  is  little  felt  the  first  year:  nineteen 
remaining  negroes  hardly  perceive  that  they  do  the 
work  which  the  preceding  year  employed  twenty. 
But  the  second  year  the  same  work  falls  to  the 
share  of  eighteen,  and,  if  another  year  passes  with- 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  323 

out  an  augmentation  by  purchase,  seventeen  must 
do  the  work  first  allotted  to  twenty.  This  must 
give  rise  to  discontent,  desertion,  and  revolt ;  or,  if 
the  negroes  put  up  patiently  with  this  surcharge  of 
labour,  illness  and  an  earlier  death  must  be  the  con¬ 
sequence.  Or  lastly,  if  the  planters  seek  to  avoid 
all  these  inconveniencies,  they  must  gradually  con¬ 
tract  the  limits  of  their  plantations,  and  of  course 
diminish  their  produce.” — Thus  immediate  inte¬ 
rest  in  all  cases,  and  urgent  distress  in  many,  are 
opposed  to  the  principles  of  justice  and  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  humanity  ?* 

What  I  have  thus  deliberately  written,  is  not,  if 
I  know  my  own  heart,  the  language  of  selfishness 
or  party.  I  confess  that,  reflecting  on  the  means 
•by  which  slaves  are  very  frequently  obtained  in 
Africa,  and  the  destruction  that  formerly  attended 
the  mode  of  transporting  them  to  the  West  Indies, 
I  was  at  on'e  time  of  opinion,  it  became  this  great 
and  renowned  nation,  instead  of  regulating  her  con¬ 
duct  by  that  of  other  states,  to  set  a  laudable  exam- 

*  The  present  annual  decrease  of  the  negroes  in  the  British  West  In 
dies  is  estimated  at  two  and  a  halt  per  centum  on  the  whole  number; 
but  if  the  same  quantity  of  labour  which  they  now  perform,  shali 
continue  to  be  exacted  from  them  as  their  numbers  diminish,  it  cannot 
be  doubted,  that  the  loss  will  be  greater  every  year,  and  augment  with 
accelerated  rapidity.  The  sugar  estates  will,  undoubtedly,  suflei 
most,  and  it  is  no  difficult  matter  to  calculate  in  what  time  they  will 
be  entirely  dismantled.  In  Jamaica  the  number  employed  in  that  line 
of  culture  in  1789  was  128,728,  all  of  whom, .  without  fresh  supplies 
from  Africa,  would  probably  be  extinct  in  less  than  thirty  year'.  t 


324  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

pie  to  them ,  by  an  immediate  and  unqualified  sup¬ 
pression  of  this  reprobated  commerce;  and  I  should 
still  maintain  and  avow  the  same  sentiments,  were 
I  not,  on  fuller  inquiry  and  better  information,  led 
to  suspect,  that  the  means  proposed  are  not  ade¬ 
quate  to  the  end.  I  fear,  that  a  direct  and  sudden 
abolition  by  one  nation  alone,  will  not  serve  the 
purposes  of  humanity  in  Africa;  and  I  am  fully 
convinced,  that  such  a  measure  will  tend  to  aggra¬ 
vate,  in  a  very  high  degree,  the  miseries  of  a  great 
majority  of  the  negroes  already  in  the  West  Indies, 
whose  decreasing  population  is  at  present  unavoid¬ 
able;  and  who,  therefore,  unless  recruited  by  sup¬ 
plies  from  Africa,  must  find  their  labours  augment, 
as  their  numbers  diminish. 

A  question  too  arises  in  this  place,  the  discussion 
of  which  might,  probably,  render  ail  further  debate 
on  the  subject  of  abolition  superfluous.  It  extends 
to  nothing  less  than  the  practicability  of  the  mea¬ 
sure.  Whether  it  be  possible  for  any  nation  in  Eu¬ 
rope,  singly  considered,  to  prevent  its  subjects  from 
procuring  slaves  in  Africa,  so  long  as  Africa  shall 
continue  to  sell,  is  a  point  on  which  I  have  many 
doubts;  but  none  concerning  the  possibility  of  con¬ 
veying  the  slaves  so  purchased  into  every  island  of 
the  West  Indies,  in  spite  of  the  maritime  force  of 
all  Europe.  No  man  who  is  acquainted  with  the 
extent  of  uninhabited  coast  in  the  larger  of  those 
islands; — the  facility  of  landing  in  every  part  of 
them: — the  prevailing  winds,  and  the  numerous 
creeks  and  harbours  in  all  the  neighbouring  domi- 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  325 

nions  of  foreign  powers,  (so  conveniently  situated 
for  contraband  traffic),  can  hesitate  a  moment  to 
pronounce,  that  an  attempt  to  prevent  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  slaves  into  our  West  Indian  colonies, 
would  be  like  that  of  chaining  the  winds,  or  giving 
laws  to  the  ocean.* 

The  next  object  to  which  it  was  proposed  to  di¬ 
rect  our  inquiries,  is  the  mode  of  conveying  slaves 
from  Africa  to  the  West  Indies,  and  their  mortality 
on  the  voyage;  constituting  the  second  ground  on 
which  most  of  the  petitioners  to  parliament  for  an 
abolition  of  the  trade,  have  rested  their  application. 
But  before  I  proceed  to  consider  this  part  of  my 
subject,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  offer  a  few  ob¬ 
servations  concerning  the  great  disproportion  of 
sexes  in  the  purchases  that  are  made  on  the  coast; 
it  being  a  well  known  fact,  that  of  the  vast  num¬ 
bers  of  slaves  annually  exported  from  Africa,  about 
one  third  only  are  females.  This  circumstance  has 

*  It  was  said  (with  what  truth  I  know  not)  that  besides  confiscation 
of  ship  and  cargo,  it  was  meant  to  consider  the  clandestine  importa¬ 
tion  of  slaves  into  our  colonies  as  a  felonious  act,  and  to  punish  it 
capitally.  The  Spaniards  treat  many  species  of  smuggling  in  this 
manner,  and  in  no  part  of  the  world  is  the  contraband  traffic  so  pre¬ 
valent  as  in  the  Spanish  dominions.  It  is  a  curious  question,  in  what 
manner  a  cargo  of  slaves,  seized  as  contraband,  would  be  disposed  of  I 
To  declare  a  set  of  poor  helpless  savages -free,  and  turn  them  loose  in 
a  strange  country,  without  food  orcloathing,  would  hardly  be  thought 
of,  and  to  send  them  back  to  Africa,  besides  the  expense  and  length 
of  the  voyage,  would  be  to  consign  them  over  to  certain  destruction. 
This  difficulty  seems  to  have  been  altogether  overlooked  during  the 
discussion  of  the  slave  business  in  parliament. 


326  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

been  tortured  into  a  charge  of  criminal  neglect  and 
improvident  avarice  against  the  planters  of  the  West 
Indies,  who  are  supposed  from  thence,  to  have  no 
wish  of  making  their  slaves  even  as  happy  as  their 
situation  will  admit,  or  of  keeping  up  their  num¬ 
bers  by  natural  increase.  How  far  these  charges 
are  founded,  let  the  following  testimony  of  a  very 
competent  .witness  determine: — <f  I  he  dispropor¬ 
tion  in  the  number  of  male  and  female  slaves  ex¬ 
ported  from  Africa  (says  Mr.  Barnes*)  appears  to 
me  to  be  imputable  to  the  three  following  causes: 
First,  to  the  practice  of  polygamy  which  prevails 
throughout  Africa.  Secondly,  to  some  of  the  very 
causes  of  slavery  itself:  Men  are  more  apt  to  com¬ 
mit  civil  offences  than  women,  and  in  all  eases, 
where  males  and  females  are  involved  in  the  same 
calamity,  the  first  cause  still  has  its  operation:  the 
young  females  are  kept  for  wives,  and  the  males  are 
sold  for  slaves.  Thirdly,  to  the  circumstance,  that  fe¬ 
males  become  unfit  for  the  slave  market  at  a  much 
earlier  period  than  the  males.  A  woman,  through 
child-bearing,  may  appear  a  very  exceptionable 
slave  at  twenty-two,  or  twenty-three  years  of  age, 
whereas,  a  healthy  well-made  man,  will  not  be  ob¬ 
jected  to  at  four  or  five  and  thirty ;  consequently, 
if  an  equal  number  of  males  and  females  of  like 
ages  were  offered  for  sale,  a  much  greater  proportion 
of  the  females  would  be  rejected  on  that  account 
only.  With  regard  to  the  question,  Whether  the 
European  traders  prefer  purchasing  males  rather 

*  Report  of  the  committee  of  council  1789. 

/ 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  327 

than  females?  I  have  to  observe;  that  though  it  is 
impossible  to  conduct  the  business,  either  of  a 
house  or  of  a  plantation,  without  a  number  of  fe¬ 
males,  yet,  as  the  nature  of  the  slave  service  in  the 
West  Indies  (being  chiefly  field  labour)  requires  for 
the  immediate  interest  of  the  planter,  a  greater 
number  of  males,  the  European  trader  would  of 
course  wish  to  purchase  his  assortment  according 
to  the  proportion  wanted;  but  the  fact  is,  he  has 
not  an  option  in  the  case,  for  the  reasons  already 
mentioned;  so  that  in  most  parts  of  Africa  it  is 
with  great  difficulty  he  can  get  as  many  saleable 
females  as  will  form  any  tolerable  assortment.” 
The  application  of  these  remarks  will  hereafter  be 
seen.— I  now  return  to  the  manner  of  transporting 
the  slaves  thus  purchased,  from  Africa  to  the  West 
Indies. 

It  is  difficult,  I  think,  to  assign  any  probable  rea¬ 
son  or  motive,  why  the  treatment  of  these  poor 
people  at  sea  should  be  otherwise  than  as  humane 
and  indulgent  as  the  safety  of  the  crew  will  admit. 
Many  shocking  instances  were  however  adduced, 
in  the  evidence  delivered  to  the  committee  of  pri¬ 
vy  council,  of  most  outrageous  and  wanton  barba¬ 
rity  and  cruelty  exercised  towards  them  in  different 
ships;  but  as  the  witnesses  that  were  brought  for¬ 
ward  to  establish  those  charges  were  not  the  most 
respectable  in  point  of  character,  and  in  some  cases 
were  proved  to  have  suits  at  law  with  the  captains 
against  whom  they  gave  evidence,  I  shall  collect 
my  account  from  less  disputable  authority. 


328  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

It  is  admitted  on  all  hands,  that  the  men  slaves 
are  secured  in  irons  when  they  first  come  on  board; 
but  Sir  George  Young,  a  captain  in  the  royal  navy, 
who  appears  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  trade 
in  all  its  branches,  is  of  opinion,  that  this  is  not 
practised  more  than  necessity  requires.  The  mode 
is,  by  fastening  every  two  men  together,  the  right 
ankie  of  one  being  locked,  by  means  of  a  small 
iron  fetter,  to  the  left  of  the  other;  and  if  marks 
of  a  turbulent  disposition  appear,  an  additional  fet¬ 
ter  is  put  on  their  wrists.  On  the  passage,  when 
danger  is  no  longer  apprehended,  these  irons  are 
commonly  taken  off;  and  women  and  young  people 
are  exempt  from  them  from  the  beginning.*  They 
are  lodged  between  decks,  on  clean  boards,  the 
men  dnd  women  being  separated  from  each  other 
by  bulk  heads;  and  fresh  air  is  admitted  by  means 
of  windsails  or  ventilators.  Covering  of  any  kind, 
as  well  from  the  warmth  of  the  climate  as  from  the 
constant  practice  of  going  naked,  would  be  insup¬ 
portable  to  them.  Every  morning,  if  the  weather 
permits,  they  are  brought  upon  deck,  and  allowed 
to  continue  there  until  the  evening.  Their  apart¬ 
ments,  in  the  mean  time,  are  washed,  scraped,  fu¬ 
migated,  and  sprinkled  with  vinegar.  The  first 
attention  paid  to  them  in  the  morning,  is  to  supply 
them  with  water  to  wash  their  hands  and  faces, 
after  which  they  are  provided  with  their  morning 
meal:  this,  according  to  the  country  from  whence 

*  The  bulk  of  the  cargo  is  generally  young  people  from  sixteen 
years  of  age  to  thirty.— The  lower  size  four  feet. 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  IV.] 


329 


they  come,  consists  either  of  Indian  corn,  or  of 
rice  or  yams.  Before  noon  they  are  constantly  and 
regularly  made  to  bathe  in  salt  water,  and  nothing 
can  be  more  agreeable  and  refreshing.  Their  dinner 
is  varied,  consisting  sometimes  of  food  to  which 
they  have  been  accustomed  in  Africa,  as  yams  and 
Indian  corn,  &c.  And  at  other  times  of  provisions 
brought  from  Europe,  as  dried  beans  and  pease, 
wheat,  shelled  barley,  and  biscuit;  all  these  are 
boiled  soft  in  steam,  and  mixed  up  with  a  sauce 
made  of  meat,  with  fish,  or  palm  oil;  this  last  is  a 
constant  and  desirable  article  in  their  cookery.  At 
each  meal  they  are  allowed  as  much  as  they  can 
eat,  and  have  likewise  a  sufficiency  of  fresh  water; 
unless  when,  from  an  uncommon  long  voyage,  the 
preservation  of  the  ship  compels  the  captain  to  put 
them  to  a  short  allowance.  Drams  also  are  given 
them  when  the  weather  is  cold  or  wet;  and  pipes 
and  tobacco  whenever  they  desire  them.  In  the 
intervals  between  their  meals,  they  are  encouraged 
to  divert  themselves  with  music  and  dancing;  for 
which  purpose  such  rude  and  uncouth  instruments 
as  are  used  in  Africa,  are  collected  before  their  de¬ 
parture;  and  they  are  also  permitted  to  amuse 
themselves  with  games  of  chance,  for  which  they 
are  likewise  furnished  with  implements  of  African 
invention.  In  sickness,  the  invalids  are  immediate¬ 
ly  removed  to  the  captain’s  cabin,  or  to  an  hospital 
built  near  the  forecastle;  and  treated  with  all  the 
care,  both  in  regard  to  medicine  and  food,  that  cir¬ 
cumstances  will  admit ;  and  when,  fortunately  for 
the  negroes,  the  ship  touches  at  any  place  in  her 
Vol.  II.  t  t 


330 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iy. 

voyage,  as  frequently  happens,  every  refreshment 
that  the  country  affords,  as  cocoa-nuts,  oranges, 
limes,  and  other  fruits,  with  vegetables  of  all  sorts, 
are  distributed  among  them ;  and  refreshments  of 
the  same  kind  are  freely  allowed  them  at  the  place 
of  their  destination,  between  the  days  of  arrival 
and  sale. 

From  this  account,  which  is  confirmed  by  the 
testimony  of  a  great  number  of  respectable  men, 
many  of  whom  were  wholly  disinterested  in  the 
question,  and  could  therefore  have  no  motive  to  vi¬ 
olate  or  suppress  the  truth,  it  may  be  supposed, 
that  every  scheme  which  can  easily  be  devised  to 
preserve  the  negroes  in  health,  cleanliness,  and 
cheerfulness,  is  adopted  in  the  voyage.  So  dread¬ 
ful,  notwithstanding,  has  been  the  mortality  in  se¬ 
veral  ships,  wherein  these  precautions  were  used,  as 
to  evince,  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  there  was 
something  in  those  instances  intrinsically  wrong; 
and  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  the  mischief  has 
been  ascribed  to  its  proper  cause,  namely,  the 
criminal  rapaciousness  of  many  of  the  ship  masters 
in  purchasing  more  negroes  than  their  accommoda¬ 
tions  are  calculated  to  convey.  It  appeared  in  evi¬ 
dence  before  the  house  of  commons,  that  a  ship  of 
240  tons  would  frequently  be  crowded  with  no  less 
than  520  slaves;  which  was  not  allowing  ten  inches 
of  room  to  each  individual.  The  consequence  of 
this  inexcusable  avarice  was  oftentimes  a  loss  of  fif¬ 
teen  per  cent,  in  the  voyage,  and  four  and  a  half 
per  cent,  more  in  the  harbours  of  the  est  Indies., 


chap,  iv.]  WEST  INDIES.  331 

previous  to  the  sale,  from  diseases  contracted  at  sea; 
— a  destruction  of  the  human  species  on  which  it  is 
impossible  to  reflect  without  indignation  and  horror! 

To  the  several  arguments,  however,  which  have 
been  raised  on  the  ground  of  these  abuses,  in  sup¬ 
port  of  the  scheme  of  abolition,  a  very  short  an¬ 
swer  may  be  given: — Admit  all  the  miseries  and 
destructive  wretchedness  which  have  been  placed 
to  this  account  to  have  existed  in  full  force,  and  it 
will  still  remain  to  be  inquired,  whether  measures 
of  less  powerful  operation  than  a  total  suppression 
of  the  trade,  will  not  obviate  in  future  the  evils 
complained  of;  because,  if  regulations  alone  are 
sufficient  for  that  purpose,  abolition  cannot  be  ne¬ 
cessary.  Regulations  have  accordingly  been  framed 
and  enforced  under  the  authority  of  the  British  par¬ 
liament,  of  which  the  certain  effect  ought  surely  to 
be  known,  before  the  evils  they  are  meant  to  re¬ 
dress  are  pronounced  irremediable.  By  an  act  of 
the  28th  year  of  his  present  majesty  (since  renew¬ 
ed  and  amended)  the  slave  ships  are  restricted  to 
the  conveyance  of  five  slaves  to  every  three  tons ; 
and  even  this  proportion  is  allowed  only  as  far  as 
201  tons.  For  every  additional  ton  they  are  limit¬ 
ed  to  one  additional  slave.*  To  these  important 
precautions  for  securing  to  the  negroes  a  sufficiency 

*  It  is  also  provided,  that  ve-ssels  not  exceeding  201  tons  shall  not 
carry  of  male  slaves  (exceeding  four  feet  four  inches  in  height)  more 
than  one  for  each  ton,  and  vessels  of  larger  size  more  tnan  three 
such  males  for  every  five  tons.  This  regulation  seems  intended  as  an 
encouragement  to  the  export  of  a  greater  proportion  of  females. 


332  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

of  room,  is  added  the  necessary  provision  of  a  re¬ 
gularly  qualified  surgeon;  to  whom,  as  well  as  to 
the  ship  master,  very  liberal  encouragement  is 
given,  to  induce  both  of  them  to  exert  every  pro¬ 
vident  endeavour  in  preserving  their  unfortunate 
captives  in  health  and  spirits:  the  sum  of  one  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  being  allowed  to  the  master,  and  fifty 
pounds  to  the  surgeon,  if  the  loss  on  the  voyage 
amounts  to  no  more  than  two  in  the  hundred,  and 
half  of  those  sums  if  the  loss  shall  not  exceed  three 
in  the  hundred. 

Of  the  full  effect  which  this  system  of  restric¬ 
tion  and  encouragement  hath  hitherto  produced  in 
all  the  British  colonies,  I  am  not  informed;  but 
judging  by  returns  which  I  have  obtained  from  one 
of  the  principal  marts  in  the  West  Indies,  it  would 
seem  to  have  been  found,  in  a  very  eminent  de¬ 
gree,  advantageous  and  salutary.  At  the  port  of 
Montego-Bay,  in  Jamaica,  the  negroes  imported 
between  the  18th  day  of  November  1789  and  the 
15th  of  July  1791,  were  9,993,  in  38  ships;  the 
mortality  at  sea,  exclusive  of  the  loss  of  54  ne¬ 
groes  in  a  mutiny  on  the  coast,  was  746,  which  is 
somewhat  under  seven  per  cent,  on  the  whole 
number  of  slaves.  This,  though  much  less,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  than  the  average  loss  which  commonly  hap¬ 
pened  before  the  regulating  law  took  place,  is,  I 
admit,  sufficiently  great;  and,  had  it  prevailed  in 
any  degree  equally  on  the  several  ships  concerned, 
might,  perhaps,  have  been  considered  as  a  fair  es¬ 
timate  of  the  general  mortality  consequent  on  the 


I 


CHAP.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES.  333 

trade,  notwithstanding  the  precautions  and  provi¬ 
sions  of  the  regulating  act.  But  on  examining  the 
list,  I  find  that  eight  of  the  38  ships,  were  entitled  to, 
and  actually  received,  the  full  premium ;  two  others 
received  the  half  premium ;  and  one  other  (a  schoo¬ 
ner  that  sailed  from  Jamaica  to  the  coast  before  the 
act  took  place)  returned  without  the  loss  of  a  single 
negro.  Of  the  746  deaths,  no  less  than  328  occur¬ 
red  in  four  ships  only,  all  of  which,  with  five  other 
vessels,  comprehending  the  whole  number  of  ships 
in  which  three-fifths  of  the  mortality  occurred,  came 
from  the  same  part  of  the  coast,  the  Bight  of  Benin; 
a  circumstance  that  gives  room  to  conclude,  (as  un¬ 
doubtedly  was  the  fact),  that  the  negroes  from  that 
part  of  the  country  brought  disease  and  contagion 
with  them  from  the  land;  an  epidemic  fever  and 
flux  generally  prevailing  on  the  low  marshy  shores 
of  the  Bonny  rivers,  during  the  autumnal  months, 
which  sometimes  proves  even  more  destructive  on 
shore  than  at  sea. 

Perhaps  the  truest  criterion  by  wrhich  to  estimate 
the  beneficial  effect  of  the  regulating  law,  is  the 
comparatively  trifling  loss  that  now  occurs  in  the 
harbours  of  the  West  Indies  before  the  Guinea 
ships  open  their  sales.  This  mortality,  which  was 
formerly  estimated  at  four  and  a  half  per  cent,  and 
was  manifestly  the  consequence  of  sickness  or  im¬ 
proper  treatment  in  the  voyage,  is  now  happily  mi¬ 
tigated  in  so  great  a  degree,  that  out  of  the  whole 
number  of  9,993  slaves  imported  into  Montego-bay 
as  before  stated,  the  loss  between  the  days  of  arrival 


334 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

and  sale,  was  no  more  than  sixty-nine,  or  not  quite 
three-fourths  per  cent.  Enough  therefore  hath  been 
effected  to  demonstrate,  that  it  is  by  no  means  im¬ 
possible,  nor  indeed  a  very  difficult  matter,  to  render 
the  conveyance  of  negroes  from  Africa  to  the  West 
Indies,  as  little  prejudicial  to  their  healths,  as  the 
transportation  of  any  other  body  of  people  across  the 
ocean  in  any  part  of  the  world.  Few  voyages  were 
more  destructive  to  the  seamen  than  that  of  lord 
Anson,  and  none  less  so  than  those  of  captain  Cook; 
an  incontestable  proof  that  the  mortality,  which  has 
commonly  occurred  at  sea,  has  at  all  times  arisen 
from  ill-constructed  ships,  and  neglect,  or  impro¬ 
per  management  on  board.* 

Concerning  the  West  India  planters,  as  they  are 
entirely  innocent  and  ignorant  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  slave  trade  is  conducted,  (having  no  other 
concern  therein  than  becoming  purchasers  of  what 
British  acts  of  parliament  have  made  objects  of  sale), 
so  it  is  equally  consonant  to  their  interests  and  their 
wishes,  that  effectual  means  should  be  pursued  for 
preserving  the  health  of  the  negroes,  by  securing  to 
them  proper  and  reasonable  accommodation  on  the 
passage.  The  assembly  of  Jamaica,  instead  of  re¬ 
monstrating  against  that  augmentation  in  the  price 


*  Perhaps  no  plan  is  so  likely  to  save  the  lives  and  preserve  the 
healths  of  the  negroes  at  sea,  as  that  of  limiting  the  slave-ships  to  two 
hundred  tons  burthen,  and  allowing  them  to  receive  on  board  only 
two,  or  two  and  and  a  half  to  a  ton.  Small  vessels  are  soon  loaded  ; 
and  from  a  multitude  of  examples  that  I  have  seen,  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  gfeatest  mortality  happens  in  the  larger  ships. 


335 


CHAP.  IV.]  WEST  INDIES. 

of  slaves,  which  they  must  have  foreseen  that  the 
act  of  the  British  parliament  would  necessarily  cre¬ 
ate,  with  the  liberality  of  dignified  minds  applauded 
the  principle  of  the  measure,  declaring  it  to  be  found¬ 
ed  in  necessity,  justice,  and  humanity,  and  expres¬ 
sed  their  opinion,  that  the  wisdom  and  authority  of 
parliament  might  be  beneficially  exerted  in  further 
regulations  of  the  African  commerce,  particularly 
in  preventing  the  detention  of  ships  on  the  coast; 
in  prohibiting  the  purchase  of  slaves  who  should 
appear  to  have  been  kidnapped;  in  compelling  the 
slave-ships  to  transport  an  equal  number  of  both 
sexes,  and  to  provide  ventilators,  and  a  sufficient 
quantity  of  provisions,  especially  water:  such  a 
recommendation  it  might  be  supposed  would  en¬ 
gage  immediate  attention,  not  only  as  coming  from 
men  who  are  certainly  the  best  judges  of  its  propri¬ 
ety  and  necessity,  but  also,  because  the  means  of 
enforcing  most  of  the  regulations  which  they  re¬ 
commend  are  practicable  and  apparent. 

EXaving  thus,  I  presume,  sufficiently  treated  of 
the  means  by  which  slaves  are  procured  for  sale  in 
Africa,  and  the  regulations  that  have  been  esta¬ 
blished  by  the  British  parliament  tor  their  better 
conveyance  to  the  Sugar  islands,  I  shall  proceed,  in 
the  next  chapter,  to  a  detail  of  their  general  treat¬ 
ment  and  situation  there,  immediately  on  and  after 
their  arrival,  and  distribution  among  the  planters. 


' 


, 


. 

■ 

. 1 

. 


.  *.  ■  • , 


I 


CHAP.  V.]  WEST  INDIES. 


337 


CHAFFER  V. 


Arrival  and  sale  in  the  West  Indies. — Negroes  newly 
purchased,  how  disposed  of  and  employed. — ■Detail  of 
the  management  of  negroes  on  a  sugar  plantation. — 
Mode  of  ' maintaining  them. — Houses ,  cloathing,  and 
medical  care. — Abases. — Late  regulations  for  their 
protection  and  security. — Causes  of  their  annual  de¬ 
crease. —  Polygamy ,  She. — Slavery  in  its  mildest  form 
unfriendly  to  population. — General  observations. — Pro¬ 
posals  for  the  further  meliorating  the  condition  of  the 
slaves,  with  which  the  subject  concludes. 

FIE  arrival  of  a  Guinea  ship  in  the  West  In- 


JL  dies  is  announced  by  public  advertisement, 
specifying  the  number  of  negroes  imported,  the 
country  from  whence,  and  day  of  sale.  It  was  the 
practice  until  of  late,  to  open  the  sale  on  ship¬ 
board,  the  males  being  arranged  in  one  part  of  the 
ship,  and  the  females  in  another:  but,  as  visitors 
of  all  descriptions  were  admitted  without  hesitation 
or  inquiry,  it  frequently  happened,  when  slave- 
ships  were  scarce,  that  such  crowds  of  people  went 
on  board,  and  began  so  disgraceful  a  scramble,  as 
Vol.  II. 


u  u 


♦ 


333  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

to  terrify  the  poor  ignorant  Africans  with  the  no¬ 
tion  that  they  were  seized  on  by  a  herd  of  canni¬ 
bals,  and  speedily  to  be  devoured.  The  wisdom 
of  the  legislature  of  Jamaica  has  corrected  this  enor¬ 
mity  in  that  island,  by  enacting  that  the  sales  shall 
be  conducted  on  shore,  and  that  care  shall  be  taken 
not  to  separate  different  branches  of  the  same  fa¬ 
mily.  I  am  afraid  it  hath  been  found  difficult,  in 
all  cases,  to  enforce  this  latter  regulation;  but  it  is 
usual  with  most  planters,  I  believe,  to  inquire  of 
the  negroes  themselves,  by  means  of  an  interpre¬ 
ter,  whether  they  have  relations  on  board,  and  to 
purchase  families  together;  or  by  exchanging  with 
other  buyers,  to  prevent  if  possible,  that  cruel  se¬ 
paration  between  parents  and  children,  and  bro¬ 
thers  and  sisters,  which  must  sometimes  I  doubt, 
unavoidably  take  place.  I  never  knew  an  instance 
where  such  purchase  or  accommodation  was  know¬ 
ingly  declined  or  refused.* 

Although  there  is  something  extremely  shocking 
to  a  humane  and  cultivated  mind,  in  the  idea  of  be¬ 
holding  a  numerous  body  of  our  unfortunate  fellow- 
creatures,  in  captivity  and  exile,  exposed  naked  to 
public  view,  and  sold  like  a  herd  of  cattle,  yet  I 
could  never  perceive,  (except  in  the  cases  that  have 


*  Soon  after  this  was  written,  the  author  of  this  work  had  the  ho¬ 
nour  of  proposing  to  the  assembly  of  Jamaica,  of  which  he  was  a 
member,  an  act  which  was  unanimously  adopted,  and  is  now  an  ex¬ 
isting  law,  by  which  the  Guinea  factors  are  compelled,  under  the  so¬ 
lemnity  of  an  oath,  to  do  their  utmost  to  enforce  the  regulation  allu- 
ded  to. 


* 


339 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES. 

been  mentioned  of  a  scramble  on  shipboard),  that  the 
negroes  themselves  were  oppressed  with  many  of 
those  painful  sensations  which  a  person  unaccus¬ 
tomed  to  the  scene  would  naturally  attribute  to 
such  apparent  wretchedness.  The  circumstance  of 
being  exposed  naked,  is  perhaps  of  little  account 
to  those  who  were  never  sensible  of  the  necessity 
or  propriety  of  being  clothed.  The  climate  requires 
not  the  aid  of  dress,  nor  are  the  negroes,  though 
naked,  destitute  of  decorations,  on  which,  at  their 
first  arrival,  they  seem  to  set  a  much  higher  estima¬ 
tion  than  on  raiment ;  most  of  the  nations  of  Africa 
having  their  skin,  particularly  on  the  forehead,  the 
breast,  and  round  the  waist,  punctured  or  impres* 
sed  with  figures  and  representations  of  different 
kinds,  (squares,  circles,  triangles,  and  crescents),  si¬ 
milar  to  the  practice  which  prevails  in  Otaheite ,  and 
the  other  islands  of  the  South  Sea,  called  tatoivhig, 
as  described  in  the  voyages  of  captain  Cook.  Like 
those  islanders  too,  some  of  the  newly  imported 
negroes  display  these  marks  with  a  mixture  of  os¬ 
tentation  and  pleasure,  either  considering  them  as 
highly  ornamental,  or  appealing  to  them  as  testi¬ 
monies  of  distinction  in  Africa;  where,  in  some 
cases,  they  are  said  to  indicate  free  birth  and  ho¬ 
nourable  parentage.*  The  negroes  are  apprised 

*  Some  of  the  negroes  of  the  Gold  coast,  or  the  adjacent  coun* 
tries  (the  Cbamba  negroes  for  instance)  appear  to  me  to  use  the  sam  , 
or  nearly  the  same  marks  as  the  savages  of  New  Zealand,  viz.  deep  inci¬ 
sions  on  each  cheek  drawn  circularly  from  the  ear  to  the  mouth.  {Vide 
Hawkes-uwrth's  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  c.  9.).  It  is  ridiculous  enough,  that 
some  of  the  writers  against  the  slave-trade  should  asciibe  these  marks 


340 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

also,  before  their  arrival,  that  they  are  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  tillage;  and,  knowing  that  they  were 
bought  with  money,  expect  to  be  sold  in  the  same 
manner.  They  display  therefore,  on  being  brought 
to  market,  very  few  signs  of  lamentation  for  their 
past  or  of  apprehension  for  their  future  condition ; 
but,  wearied  out  with  confinement  at  sea,  com¬ 
monly  express  great  eagerness  to  be  sold;  present¬ 
ing  themselves,  when  the  buyers  are  few,  with 
chearfulness  and  alacrity  for  selection,  and  appearing 
mortified  and  disappointed  when  refused.  If  it 
happens,  as  it  frequently  does,  when  the  purchasers 
have  leisure  and  opportunity  to  inspect  them  indi¬ 
vidually,  that  some  bodily  defect  or  blemish  is  dis¬ 
covered  in  any  of  them,  the  majority  seem  highly 
diverted  at  the  circumstance;  manifesting,  by  loud 
and  repeated  bursts  of  laughter,  that  reflection 
constitutes  no  very  predominant  part  of  their  cha¬ 
racter.* 


of  superstition  or  false  taste  to  the  cruelty  of  the  planters,  and  gravely 
assert,  that  they  are  the  scars  of  horrible  gashes  inflicted  by  the  bloody 
hand  of  tyranny  in  the  wantonness  of  punishment.  The  reverend 
Mr.  Clarkson  catches  very  eageily  at  this  idea,  and  asserts  with  great 
solemnity,  that  cc  it  is  a  matter  of  constant  lamentation  with  disin- 
“  terested  people,  who  out  of  curiosity  attended  the  negro  markets  in 
“  Jamaica,  that  they  are  not  able  to  turn  their  eyes  on  any  group  of 
“  negroes  without  beholding  these  inhuman  marks  of  passion,  despo- 
<l  tism,  and  caprice!” 

*  The  prices  of  new  negroes  in  the  West  Indies,  at  this  time  (1791 ) 
are  nearly  as  follows  : — An  able  man  in  his  prime  £.50  sterling  ;  a« 
able  woman,  £.49  sterling;  a  youth  approaching  to  manhood,  £.47 
sterling;  a  you Qg  girl,  £-46  sterling;  boys  and  girls  from  £.40  to 
y.45  sterling,  exclusive  of  the  colonial  tax  or  duty  on  -importation* 
about  twenty  shillings  more. 


WEST  INDIES. 


34i 


CHAP.  V.j 

The  buyer  having  completed  his  assortment,  and 
clothed  his  newly  acquired  subjects  with  a  coarse 
German  linen,  called  Oznaburgs,  and  provided 
them  also  with  hats,  handkerchiefs,  and  knives, 
sends  them  to  the  place  of  their  intended  resi¬ 
dence:*  and  now  a  practice  prevails  in  Jamaica, 
which  I  myself,  unacquainted  as  I  then  was  with 
the  actual  management  in  detail  of  a  sugar  planta¬ 
tion,  and  residing,  in  a  distant  country,  used  to  repro¬ 
bate  and  exclaim  against;  but  to  which  I  now  sub¬ 
mit,  from  a  full  conviction,  founded  on  experience,  of 
its  usefulness  and  necessity.  The  practice  is  that  of 
distributing  the  newly  imported  Africans  among 
the  old  negroes,  as  pensioners  (with  some  little  as¬ 
sistance  occasionally  given)  on  their  little  peculiam , 
and  provision  grounds.  This  I  used  to  consider  as 
an  insupportable  hardship  on  the  poor  people  alrea¬ 
dy  settled  and  domesticated,  and  I  positively  and 
expressly  forbad  a  continuance  of  the  custom  in 
plantations  over  which  I  had  authority. 

On  my  return  to  the  West  Indies,  I  was  sur¬ 
prised  to  find  the  old  established  negroes,  when 
young  people  newly  arrived  from  Africa,  were  sent 
among  them,  request  as  a  particular  instance  of  fa¬ 
vour  and  indulgence  to  themselves,  the  revival  and 

*  It  is  the  custom  among  some  of  the  planters  in  Jamaica,  to  mark 
the  initials  of  their  name  on  the  shoulder  or  breast  of  each  newly  pur¬ 
chased  negro,  by  means  of  a  small  silver  brand  heated  in  the  flame  of 
spit  its,  as  described  in  a  former  chapter;  but  it  is  growing  into  dis¬ 
use,  and  I  believe  in  the  Windward  Islands  thought  altogether  unne¬ 
cessary. 


042  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

continuance  of  the  ancient  system;  assuring  me 
they  had  the  means  of  supporting  the  strangers 
without  difficulty.  Many  who  thus  applied,  pro¬ 
posed  each  of  them  to  adopt  one  of  their  young 
country-folks  in  the  room  of  children  they  had  lost 
by  death,  or  had  been  deprived  of  in  Africa;  others, 
because  they  wished,  like  the  patriarchs  of  old,  to 
see  their  sons  take  to  themselves  wives  from  their 
own  nation  and  kindred;  and  all  of  them,  I  pre¬ 
sume,  because,  among  other  considerations,  they 
expected  to,  revive  and  retrace  in  the  conversation 
of  their  new  visitors,  the  remembrance  and  ideas 
of  past  pleasures  and  scenes  of  their  youth.  The 
strangers  too  were  best  pleased  with  this  arrange¬ 
ment,  and  ever  afterwards  considered  themselves 
as  the  adopted  children  of  those  by  whom  they 
were  thus  protected,  calling  them  parents,  and  ve¬ 
nerating  them  as  such ;  and  I  never  knew  an  in¬ 
stance  of  the  violation  of  a  trust  thus  solicited  and 
bestowed.  In  the  course  of  eight  or  ten  months, 
provided  they  are  mildly  used  and  kept  free  of  dis¬ 
ease,  new  people,  under  these  circumstances,  be¬ 
come  reconciled  to  the  country;  begin  to  get  well 
established  in  their  families,  their  houses  and  provi¬ 
sion  grounds;  and  prove  in  all  respects  as  valuable 
as  the  native  or  creole  negroes  A 

*  Generally  speaking,  a  creole  negro  is  considered  as  worth  more 
than  one  imported;  but  in  a  valuation,  by  indifferent  persons,  of  two 
able  well  disposed  negroes,  nearly  of  the  same  age,  the  one  an  Afri¬ 
can,  the  other  a  native,  no  great  difference  (if  any)  would  be  made. 
A  child  just  born  is  valued  at  five  pounds. 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  334 

What  has  hitherto  been  observed  concerning  the 
disposal  of  Africans  newly  imported,  is,  I  believe, 
applicable  to  West  India  estates  of  all  descriptions; 
but,  as  my  own  personal  attention  has  been  chiefly 
directed  to  sugar  plantations)  I  would  be  under¬ 
stood  to  speak  of  those  more  particularly;  and  I 
shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  methodical  ar¬ 
rangement  and  distribution  of  the  labour  with 
which  they  are  conducted,  as  it  is  unquestionably 
more  severe  and  constant  than  that  on  any  other 
species  of  landed  property  in  the  West  Indies. 

The  negroes  are  divided  into  three  sets  or  class¬ 
es,  usually  called  gangs ;  the  first  consisting  of 
the  most  healthy  and  robust  of  the  men  and  wo¬ 
men,  whose  chief  business  it  is,  out  of  crop  time, 
to  clear,  hole,  and  plant  the  ground;  and,  in  crop 
time,  to  cut  the  canes,  feed  the  mills,  and  attend 
the  manufacture  of  the  sugar.  It  is  computed  that, 
in  the  whole  body  of  the  negroes  on  a  well  condi¬ 
tioned  plantation,  there  are  commonly  found  one- 
third  of  this  description,  exclusive  of  domestics 
and  negro  tradesmen,  viz.  carpenters,  coopers  and 
masons,  with  which  each  well  regulated  plantation 
is  provided.*  The  second  gang  is  composed  of 

*  The  annual  profit  arising  to  the  owner,  from  the  labour  of  each 
able  field  negro  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  sugar,  may  be  reckoned 
at  twenty-five  pounds  sterling  money.  I  reckon  thus A  sugar 
plantation,  well  conducted,  and  in  a  favourable  soil,  ought  to  yield 
as  many  hogsheads  of  sugar,  of  16  cwt.  annually,  as  there  are  ne¬ 
groes  belonging  to  it,  the  average  value  of  which,  for  ten  years  past, 
may  be  stated  at  £,15  sterling  the  hogshead,  but  as  every  plantation 


344 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it. 

young  boys  and  girls,  women  far  gone  with  child, 
and  convalescents,  who  are  chiefly  employed  in 
weeding  the  canes,  and  other  light  work  adapted 
to  their  strength  and  condition ;  and  the  third  set 
consists  of  young  children,  attended  by  a  careful 
old  woman,  who  are  employed  in  collecting  green 
meat  for  the  pigs  and  sheep;  or  in  weeding  the 
garden,  or  some  such  gentle  exercise,  merely  to 
preserve  them  from  habits  of  idleness. 

The  first  gang  is  summoned  to  the  labours  of 
the  field  either  by  a  bell  or  the  blowing  of  a  conch- 
shell,  just  before  sun-rise.  They  bring  with  them, 
besides  their  hoes  or  bills,  provisions  for  breakfast; 
and  are  attended  by  a  white  person,  and  a  black 
superintendant  called  a  driver. — The  list  being  call¬ 
ed  over,  and  the  names  of  all  the  absentees  noted, 
they  proceed  with  their  work  until  eight  or  nine 
o’clock,  when  they  sit  down  in  the  shade  to  break¬ 
fast,  which  is  prepared  in  the  mean  time  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  number  of  women,  whose  sole  employment 

is  not  thus  productive,  and  the  rum,  which  is  generally  appropriated 
to  the  payment  of  contingent  charges,  not  being  always  sufficient  for 
that  purpose,  I  will  allow  £.10  sterling  only,  as  the  clear  profit  per 
hogshead  of  the  sugar,  which  therefore  is  the  average  value  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  each  negro,  old  and  young  ;  and  one  third  only  of  the  ne¬ 
groes  being  able  people,  their  labour  may  be  put  at  £.30  a  head;  out 
of  which  however  must  be  deducted,  the  interest  on  their  first  cost, 
and  an  allowance  for  the  risk  of  losing  them  by  death  dr  desertion, 
(their  maintenance,  &c.  being  included  in  the  contingent  expenses  of 
the  estate),  for  both  of  which  I  allow  fifteen  per  cent.  This  leaves 
about  £.25  sterling  clear,  or  nearly  a  fourth  part  of  the  actual  value 
of  each  slave. 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  ^4i 

it  is  to  act  as  cooks  for  the  rest.  This  meal  com¬ 
monly  consists  of  boiled  yams,  eddoes,  okra,  cala- 
lue  and  plantains,  or  as  many  of  those  vegetables 
as  they  can  procure;  seasoned  with  salt,  and  Ca¬ 
yenne  pepper;  and,  in  truth,  it  is  an  exceeding 
palatable  and  wholesome  mess.  By  this  time  most 
of  the  absentees  make  their  appearance,  and  are 
sometimes  punished  for  their  sluggishness  by  a  few 
stripes  of  the  driver’s  whip.  But  I  am  happy  to 
say,  that  of  late  years  a  very  slight  excuse  is  gene¬ 
rally  admitted.  The  fact  is,  that  when  the  mo  n- 
ings  are  chili  and  foggy,  as  frequently  happens  even 
under  the  zone,  the  sensations  of  the  negro  cm 
distressful  beyond  the  imagination  of  an  inhabitant 
of  frozen  regions.  Instead  of  deriving  firmness 
and  activity  from  the  cold,  he  becomes  inert,  slug¬ 
gish  and  languid;  and  neither  labour  nor  punish¬ 
ment  will  animate  him  to  greater  exertion,  until  he 
is  revivified  by  the  genial  warmth  of  the  sun.  At 
breakfast  they  are  seldom  indulged  with  more  than 
half  or  three  quarters  of  an  hour;  and,  having  re¬ 
sumed  their  work,  continue  in  the  field  until  noon, 
when  the  bell  calls  them  from  labour.  They  are 
now  allowed  two  hours  of  rest  and  refreshment; 
one  of  which  is  commonly  spent  4n  sleep.  Their 
dinner  is  provided  with  the  addition  of  salted 
or  pickled  fish,  of  which  each  negro  receives  a 
weekly  allowance.  Many  of  them,  however,  pre¬ 
ferring  a  plentiful  supper  to  a  meal  at  noon,  pass 
the  hours  of  recess,  either  in  sleep,  or  in  collecting 
iood  for  their  pigs  and  poultry,  of  which  they  are 
permitted  to  keep  as  many  as  they  please;  or  pcr- 
Vol.  II. 


X  X 


46  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iy, 

haps  a  few  of  the  more  industrious,  wilt  employ  an 
hour  in  their  provision  grounds.  At  two  o’clock 
they  are  again  summoned  to  the  field,  where,  ha¬ 
ving  been  refreshed  both  by  rest  and  food,  they 
now  manifest  some  signs  of  vigorous  and  animated 
application ;  although  I  can  with  great  truth  assert, 
that  one  English  labourer  in  his  own  climate  would 
perform  at  least  three  times  the  work  of  any  one 
negro  in  the  same  period.  At  sun-set,  or  very  soon 
after,  they  are  released  for  the  night,  (the  drudge¬ 
ry,  so  much  complained  of  in  some  of  the  islands 
to  windward,  of  picking  grass,  being  happily  un¬ 
known  in  Jamaica),  and  if  the  day  has  been  wet, 
or  their  labour  harder  than  uAial,  they  are  some¬ 
times  indulged  with  an  allowance  of  rum.  On  the 
whole,  as  the  length  of  the  days  in  the  latitude  of 
the  West  Indies  differs  very  little  throughout  the 
year,  I  conceive  they  are  employed  daily  about  ten 
hours,  in  the -  service  of  their  master,  Sundays  and 
holydays  excepted.  In  the  crop  season,  however, 
the  system  is  different;  for  at  that  time,  such  of 
the  negroes  as  are  employed  in  the  mill  and  boiling 
houses,  often  work  very  late,  frequently  all  night; 
but  they  are  divided  into  watches,  which  relieve 
each  other,  according  to  the  practice  among  sea¬ 
men;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  at  this  season  the 
negroes  enjoy  higher  health  and  vigour  than  at  any 
other  period  of  the  year;  a  circumstance  undoubt- 
edlv  owing-  to  the  free  and  unrestrained  use  which 
they  are  allowed  to  make  of  the  ripe  canes,  the 
cane-liquor,  and  syrup. 


347 


CHAP.  v.]  WEST  INDIES. 

The  practice  which  prevails  in  Jamaica  of  giving 
the  negroes  lands  to  cultivate,  from  the  produce  of 
which  they  are  expected  to  maintain  themselves, 
(except  in  times  of  scarcity,  arising  from  hurricanes 
and  droughts,  when  assistance  is  never  denied 
them),  is  universally  allowed  to  be  judicious  and 
beneficial;  producing  a  happy  coalition  of  interests 
between  the  master  and  the  slave.  The  negro 
who  has  acquired  by  his  own  labour  a  property  in 
his  master’s  land,  has  much  to  lose,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  less  inclined  to  desert  his  work.  He  earns  a 
little  money,  by  which  he  is  enabled  to  indulge 
himself  in  fine  clothes  on  holydays,  and  gratify  his 
palate  with  salted  meats  and  other  provisions  that 
otherwise  he  could  not  obtain;  and  the  proprietor 
Is  eased,  in  a  great  measure,  of  the  expense  oi 
feeding  him.  In  some  of  the  Windward  Islands 
they  have  not  land  enough  for  the  purpose;  nor  in 
any  one  of  them  are  the  negroes  so  happily  accom¬ 
modated,  in  this  respect,  as  in  the  large  island  of 
Jamaica;  where  they  are  seldom  either  stinted  in 
quantity  of  land,  or  confined  as  to  situation.  In 
fact,  if  the  owner’s  territory  is  sufficiently  exten¬ 
sive,  the  negroes  make  it  a  practice  to  enlarge 
their  own  grounds,  or  exchange  them  tor  fresh 
land  every  year.  By  these  means,  having  quicker 
and  better  returns,  they  raise  provisions  in  abun¬ 
dance,  not  only  for  their  own  use,  but  also  a  great, 
surplus  to  sell.  The  misfortune  is,  they  trust  more 
to  plantain  groves,  corn,  and  other  vegetables,  that 
are  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  storms,  than  to  what 
are  called  ground  provisions ;  such  as  yarns,  eddoes, 


343  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

potatoes,  cassada,  and  other  esculent  roots;  all 
which  are  out  of  the  reach  of  hurricanes;  but  pru¬ 
dence  is  a  term  that  has  no  place  in  the  negro  vo¬ 
cabulary.  To  obviate  the  mischiefs  which  fatal  ex¬ 
perience  has  proved  to  flow  from,  this  gross  inat¬ 
tention,  the  slave  act  of  Jamaica  obliges,  under  a 
penalty,  every  proprietor  of  lands  to  keep,  proper¬ 
ly  cultivated  in  ground  provisions,  one  acre  for 
every  ten  negroes,  exclusive  of  the  negro  grounds.* 

*  In  Jamaica  the  negroes  are  allowed  one  day  in  a  fortnight,  except 
in  lime  of  crop,  besides  Sundays  and  holydays,  for  cultivating  their 
grounds  and  carrying  their  provisions  to  market.  Some  of  them  find 
time  on  these  days,  besides  raising  provisions,  to  make  a  few  coarse 
manufactures,  such  as  mats  for  beds,  bark  ropes  of  a  strong  and  du¬ 
rable  texture,  wicker  chairs  and  baskets,  earthen  jars,  pans,  &c.  for 
all  which  they  find  a  ready  sale  ;  but  I  cannot  say  much  for  the  skill 
and  elegance  of  their  workmanship.  The  most  industrious  of  the  ne¬ 
groes  do  not,  I  believe,  employ  more  than  sixteen  hours  in  a  month  in 
the  cultivation  of  their  own  provision  gardens  (leaving  all  further  care 
of  them  to  the  beneficence  of  nature)  and  in  favourable  seasons  this 
is  sufficient.  Sunday  is  their  day  of  market,  and  it  is  wonderful  what 
numbers  are  then  seen,  hastening  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  to¬ 
wards  the  towns  and  shipping  places,  laden  with  fruits  and  vegetables, 
pigs,  goats,  and  poultry,  their  own  property.  In  Jamaica  it  is  sup¬ 
posed  that  upwards  of  io;ooo  assemble  every  Sunday  morning  in  the 
market  of  Kingston,  where  they  barter  their  provisions,  &c.  for  salt¬ 
ed  beef  and  pork,  or  fine  linen  and  ornaments  for  their  wives  and  chi  I  - 
'  dren.  I  do  not  believe  that  an  instance  can  be  produced  of  a  master  s 
interfering  with  his  negroes  in  their  peculium  thus  acquired.  They  are 
permitted  also  to  dispose  at  their  deaths  of  what  little  property  they 
possess  5  and  even  to  bequeath  their  grounds  or  gardens  to  such  of 
their  fellow  slaves  as  they  think  proper.  These  principles  are  so  well 
established,  that  whenever  it  is  found  convenient  for  the  owner  to  ex¬ 
change  the  negro-grounds  for  other  lands,  the  negroes  must  be  satis¬ 
fied,  in  money  or  otherwise,  before  the  exchange  .takes  place.  It  is 
universally  the  practice. 


WEST  INDIES, 


CHAP,  V.] 


349 


The  cottages  of  the  negroes  usually  compose  a 
•small  village,  the  situation  of  which,  for  the  sake 
of  convenience  and  water,  is  commonly  near  the 
buildings  in  which  the  manufacture  of  sugar  is  con¬ 
ducted.  They  are  seldom  placed  with  much  re¬ 
gard  to  order,  but,  being  always  intermingled  with 
fruit  trees,  particularly  the  banana,  the  avocado- 
pear,  and  the  orange,  (the  negroes’  own  planting 
and  property),  they  sometimes  exhibit  a  pleasing 
and  picturesque  appearance.  To  affirm  that  they 
are  very  tolerable  habitations,  according  to  the  idea 
which  an  untravelled  Englishman  would  probably 
form  of  the  world,  were  an  insult  to  the  reader  5 
but  it  may  honestly  be  said,  that  allowing  for  the 
difference  of  climate,  they  far  excel  the  cabins  of 
the  Scotch  and  Irish  peasants  as  described  by  Mr. 
Young  and  other  travellers.  They  are  such,  at  least, 
as  are  commensurate  to  the  desires  and  necessities 
of  their  inhabitants,  who  build  them  according  to 
their  own  fancy  both  in  size  and  shape,  the  master 
allowing  the  timber,  and  frequently  permitting  the 
estate’s  carpenters  to  assist  in  the  building.  In  ge¬ 
neral,  a  cottage  for  one  negro  and  his  wife,  is  from 
fifteen  to  twenty  feet  in  length,  and  divided  into 
two  apartments.  It  is  composed  of  hard  posts  dri¬ 
ven  into  the  ground,  and  interlaced  with  whattles 
and  plaister.  The  height  from  the  ground  to  the 
plate  being  barely  sufficient  to  admit  the  owner  to 
walk  in  upright.  The  floor  is  of  natural  earth, 
which  is  commonly  dry  enough,  and  the  roof  thatch¬ 
ed  with  palm  thatch,  or  the  leaves  of  the  cocoa- 


35° 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

nut-tree ;  an  admirable  covering,  forming  a  lasting 
and  impenetrable  shelter  both  against  the  sun  and 
the  rain.  Of  furniture  they  have  no  great  matters 
to  boast,  nor  considering  their  habits  of  life,  is 
much  required.  The  bedstead  is  a  platform  of 
boards,  and  the  bed  a  mat,  covered  with  a  blanket; 
a  small  table;  two  or  three  low  stools;  an  earthen 
jar  for  holding  water;  a  few  smaller  ones;  a  pail; 
an  iron  pot;  calabashes *  of  different  sizes  (serving 
very  tolerably  for  plates,  dishes,  and  bowls)  make 
up  the  rest.  Their  cookery  is  conducted  in  the 
open  air,  and  fire-wood  being  always  at  hand,  they 
have  not  only  a  sufficiency  for  that  purpose,  but  also 
for  a  fire  within  doors  during  the  night,  without 
which  a  negro  cannot  sleep  with  comfort.  It  is 
made  in  the  middle  of  one  of  the  two  rooms,  and 
the  smoke  makes  its  wav  through  the  door  or  the 
thatch.  This  account  of  their  accommodation, 
however,  is  confined  to  the  lowest  among  the  field- 
negroes:  tradesmen  and  domestics  are  in  general 
vastly  better  lodged  and  provided.  Many  of  these 
have  larger  houses,  with  boarded  floors,  and  are 
accommodated  (at  their  own  expense  it  is  true) 
with  very  decent  furniture: — a  few  have  even 
good  beds,  linen  sheets,  and  musquito  nets,  and 
display  a  shelf  or  two  of  plates  and  dishes  of  queen’s 
or  Staffordshire  ware. 

Of  cloathing,  the  allowance  of  the  master  is  not 
always  so  liberal  as  might  be  wished,  but  much 


*  A  species  of  gourd. 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  351 

more  so  of  late  years  than  formerly.*  Few  of  the 
negroes  however,  on  Sundays  and  holydays,  ap¬ 
pear  deficient  in  this  point,  or  shew  any  want  of 
raiment,  not  only  decent  but  gaudy. 

The  circumstances  wherein  the  slaves  in  the 
West  Indies  seem  mostly  indebted  to  their  owners’ 
liberality,  are,  I  think,  those  of  medical  attendance 
and  accommodation  when  sick.  Every  plantation, 
that  I  am  acquainted  with,  is  under  the  daily  or 
weekly  inspection  of  a  practitioner  in  physic  and 
surgery,  who  very  frequently  resides  on  the  spot; 
and  the  planters,  being  in  general  men  of  educa¬ 
tion  themselves,  are  not  easily  reconciled  in  so  im¬ 
portant  a  matter,  with  such  illiterate  pretenders  in 
medicine  as  are  very  often  found  in  the  country 
parts  of  England,  to  the  disgrace  of  the  profession. 
Young  men  of  skill  and  science  are  therefore  sought 
for  and  encouraged;  and  as  but  few  single  planta¬ 
tions  can  afford  a  very  liberal  allowance,  they  are 
permitted  to  extend  their  practice  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  + 

1 

*  I  believe  the  negroes  on  every  plantation  in  Jamaica,  without  ex¬ 
ception,  receive  a  yearly  allowance  of  oznaburg-linen,  woollen,  baize, 
checks,  &c.  and  but  very  few  planters  deny  them  hats,  handkerchiefs, 
and  other  little  articles,  as  knives,  needles  and  thread,  See.  &c. 

f  The  usual  recompense  to  the  surgeon  for  attendance  and  medi¬ 
cines,  is  six  shillings  a  head  per  annum  for  all  the  negroes  on  the 
estate,  whether  sick  or  well,  imputations,  difficult  cases  in  mid¬ 
wifery,  inoculation,  &c.  are  paid  for  exclusively,  and  on  a  liberal 
scale.  A  property  having  five  hundred  negroes  contributes  about 
£.150  sterling  per  annum  5  and  the  surgeon  if  he  chooses,  is  entitled 


352 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

For  the  better  accommodation  of  invalids  and 
women  in  child-birth,  every  plantation  is  provided 

to  board,  washing,  and  lodging;  and  this  is  altogether  independant  of 
the  profits  of  his  practice  with  the  whites.  I  suppose  there  are  few 
plantation  doctors  in  Jamaica,  that  have  less  than  five  hundred  ne¬ 
groes  under  their  care;  several  (with  their  assistants)  have  upwards  of 
five  thousand. 

Among  the  diseases  which  negroes  bring  with  them  from  Africa, 
the  most  loathsome  are  the  cacabay  and  the yanvs  ;  and  it  is  difficult 
to  say  which  is  the  worst.  The  former  is  the  leprosy  of  the  Arabi¬ 
ans,  and  the  latter  (much  the  most  common)  is  supposed,  by’some 
writers,  to  lie  the  leprosy  mentioned  in  Leviticus,  c,  xiii.  Both  are 
very  accurately  described  by  Doctor  Hillary,  in  his  Observations  on 
the  Diseases  of  Barbadoes.  Young  negro  children  often  catch  the 
yaws,  and  get  through  it  without  medicine  or  much  inconveniency. 
At  a  later  period  it  is  seldom  or  never  thoroughly  eradicated  ;  and  as, 
like  the  small-pox,  it  is  never  had  but  once,  the  Gold  coast  negroes 
are  said  to  communicate  the  infection  to  their  infants  by  inoculation. 
I  very  much  doubt  if  medicine  of  any  kind  is  of  use  in  this  disease. — - 
But  the  greatest  mortality  among  the  negroes  in  the  West  Indies  arises 
from  two  other  complaints;  the  one  affecting  infants  between  the  fifth 
and  fourteenth  days  after  their  birth,  and  of  which  it  is  supposed  that 
one-fourth  of  all  the  negro  children  perish.  It  is  a  species  of  tetanus , 
or  locked  jaw  ;  but  both  the  cause  of  it  in  these  poor  children,  and  the 
remedy,  remain  yet  to  be  discovered.  The  other  complaint  affects 
adults,  or  rather  negroes  who  are  past  their  prime.  They  become 
dropsical,  and  complain  of  a  constant  uneasiness  in  the  stomach  ; 
for  which  they  find  a  temporary  relief  in  eating  some  kind  of  earth. 
The  French  planters  call  this  disease  mal  d'estomac,  or  the  stomach 
evil.  I  have  formerly  heard  of  owners  and  managers  who  were  so  ig¬ 
norant  and  savage  as  to  attempt  the  cure  by  severe  punishment;  con¬ 
sidering  dirt  eating,  not  as  a  disease,  but  a  crime.  I  hope  the  race  is 
extinct.  The  best  and  only  remedy  is  kind  usage  and  wholesome  ani¬ 
mal  food  ;  and  perhaps  a  steel  drink  may  be  of  some  service.  Of  one 
poor  fellow  in  this  complaint,  I  myself  made  a  perfect  cure  by  persist¬ 
ing  some  time  in  this  method. 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  3$3 

with  a  sick-house  or  hospital,  divided  into  different 
apartments;  and  over  which  one  or  more  aged  wo¬ 
men  preside  as  nurses.  The  proprietor  commonly 
supplies  blankets,  flour,  rice,  sugar,  and  oatmeal : 
these  things  I  have  seldom  known  to  be  denied, 
and  some  gentlemen  afford,  besides  fresh  beef  and 
mutton,  more  costly  articles ;  such  as  spices,  sago, 
and  wine. 

On  the  whole,  notwithstanding  some  defects,  let 
allowance  be  made  for  the  climate  and  soil,  and  it 
maybe  asserted  with  truth  and  modesty,  that  if  the 
situation  of  the  slaves  in  the  British  West  Indies 
were,  in  all  cases,  on  a  level  with  their  circumstan¬ 
ces  in  regard  to  food,  lodging  and  medical  assist¬ 
ance,  they  might  be  deemed  objects  of  envy  to 
half  the  peasantry  of  Europe. 

At  the  same  time  let  it  not  be  forgotten,  that  the 
legislative  authority  in  many  of  the  sugar  islands, 
has  been,  and  still  is,  most  humanely  and  laudably 
exerted  in  exalting  the  condition  of  the  slave  in  all 
respects,  and  circumscribing  the  power  of  the  mas¬ 
ter. — 44  Protection  of  their  slaves  (says  the  report 
44  of  the  privy  council)  made  but  a  very  small  por- 
44  tion  of  their  earlier  policy.  This  branch  has  of 
44  late  been  taken  up,  and  express  directions  have 
44  been  given  to  insure  to  the  negroes,  the  en~ 
44joyment  of  many  advantages  tending  to  allevi- 
44  ate  their  condition.  In  three  islands  particularly, 
44  (Jamaica,  Grenada,  and  Dominica),  the  wish  to 
44  soften  the  rigours  of  their  situation  has  manifested 
VoL  IE  y  y 


354  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  tr, 

itself  more  decidedly.  Measures  have  been  devi- 
“  sed  by  the  legislatures  of  those  islands  for  placing 
“  them  in  a  state  of  society*  where  they  will  be 
**  entitled  to  a  protection,  that  in  former  times,. 
“  would  have  been  thought  incompatible  with  the 
“  dependancc  and  subordination  of  slavery.” 

To  this  distinguished  and  honourable  testimony  it 
may  be  added,  as  a  circumstance  of  still  greater 
importance,  that  the  age  itself  is  hourly  improving 
in  humanity  :  and  that  this  improvement  visibly 
extends  beyond  the  Atlantic.  Its  influence  is  felt 
where  the  law  is  a  dead  letter.  This,  however,  is  to 
be  understood  with  considerable  allowance;  for  it 
is  a  melancholy  truth,  that  authority  over  these  poor 
people  must  on  several  occasions,  unavoidably  de¬ 
volve  into  hands  that  will  employ  it  only  in  its  abuse ; 
and  in  cases  too,  in  which,  if  redress  be  sought, 
the  testimony  of  the  injured  party  is  inadmissible  in 
a  court  of  justice.  Under  those  circumstances, 
while  the  law  loses  its  authority,  I  am  afraid,  that 
the  sense  of  decorum,  alone,  affords  but  a  feeble  re¬ 
straint  against  the  corrupt  passions  and  infirmities  of 
our  nature,  the  hardness  of  avarice,  the  pride  of  pow¬ 
er,  the  sallies  of  anger,  and  the  thirst  of  revenge. 

That -the  narratives  therefore  of  excessive  whip¬ 
pings,  and  barbarous  mutilations,  which  have  late¬ 
ly  awakened  the  sympathy  of  the  public,  are  all  of 
them  “  absolutely  false,” — though  it  has  been  as¬ 
serted  bv  others,  shall  not  be  asserted  by  me.  It 
they  have  happened  but  seldom,  they  have  .happen- 


WEST  INDIES. 


355 


CHAP.  V.] 

cd  too  often.  The  difference  between  me,  and 
those  who,  on  this  ground,  continue  to  urge  the 
necessity  of  an  immediate  and  total  suppression  of 
the  slave-trade,  is  this;  they  assert  that  it  is  not  un- 
frequent ,  but  common ,  the  occurrence  of  every 
hour,  to  behold  the  miserable  negroes  fall  victims  to 
a  series  of  cruelties  of  which  no  other  age  or  coun¬ 
try  affords  an  example ;  and  they  maintain,  that  the 
planters  in  general  are  guilty  of  these  cruelties, 
without  commiseration  or  remorse.  I,  on  the 
other  hand,  aver  that,  although  such  enormitie’s 
have  certainly  sometimes  happened,  and  may  hap¬ 
pen  again,  yet  that  the  general  treatment  of  the 
negroes  in  the  British  West  Indies  is  mild,  tempe¬ 
rate,  and  indulgent ;  that  instances  of  cruelty  are 
not  only  rare,  but  always  universally  reprobated 
when  discovered;  and,  when  susceptible  of  legal 
proof,  severely  punished.* 

*  As  the  latter  part  of  this  assertion  has  been  very  confidently  de¬ 
nied  by  some  of  the  witnesses  that  have  appeared  before  a  committee  of 
the  house  of  commons,  I  beg  leave  to  trouble  the  reader  with  the  fol¬ 
lowing  cases  in  point  : 

“  Spanish  town,  Jamaica,  Feb.  1777-  Thomas  Fell  was  indicted 
for  assaulting  a  negro  man  slave,  the  property  of  Richard  Welch,  Esq. 
and  found  guilty.  Sentenced  to  pay  a  fine  to  the  king  of  twenty  , 
pounds,  and  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  common  gaol  one  week,  and 
until  payment  of  the  fine.” 

“  Kingston,  Jamaica.  At  the  Surry  assize,  17865  George  Ged- 
des  was  tried,  and  found  guilty  on  two  indictments,  for  cruelly  beat¬ 
ing  and  maiming  two  of  his  own  slaves.  Sentenced  to  pay  a  fine  to 
the  king  of  one  hundred  pounds  on  each  indictment,  and  to  be  impri- 


356  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book.  iv. 

The  great,  and  I  fear  incurable,  defect  in  the 
system  of  slavery,  is  the  circumstance  already  men- 

soned  six  months  in  the  jail  of  Kingston,  and  until  payment  of  the 
fine  ;  and  afterwards  to  find  security  for  his  good  behaviour,  &c.” 

“  Surry  assize,  1778.  John  Durant  a  free  man  of  colour  was  in* 
dieted  and  found  guilty  of  assaulting  a  negro  man  slave,  named  Sacco, 
the  property  of  Eliza  Wheeler,  a  free  negro  woman.  Sentenced  to  he 
publickly  flogged  at  the  beef  market.” 

“  Quarter  session,  Kingston,  August,  1791.  The  King  versus 
' ’Thompson ,  for  assaulting  and  falsely  imprisoning  a  negro  boy,  the 
property  of  Francis  Robertson,  Found  guilty  and  fined  ten  pounds.*— 
King  versus  Bender ,  for  wantonly  and  immoderately  punishing  a  ne¬ 
gro  man,  his  own  property,  named  Fortune.  Found  guilty  and  fined 
twenty  pounds.” 

The  above  are  extracts  fairly  abridged  from  the  records  in  the  pro¬ 
per  office  in  Jamaica.  Testimonies  of  the  same  kind,  more  fully  sta¬ 
ted,  from  the  island  of  St.  Christopher,  appear  in  the  report  of  the 
committee  of  Privy  Council ;  to  whom  evidence  was  likewise  given, 
that  a  white  man  in  the  island  of  Grenada,  was  in  the  year  1776,  con¬ 
victed  of  the  murder  of  his  own  slave,  and  executed.  If  many  other 
cases  cannot  be  cited,  it  may  fairly  be  supposed,  from  those  which 
have  been  adduced,  that  fresh  occasion  has  not  often  been  given.  The 
following  shocking  instance,  however,  happened  in  the  island  of  Ja¬ 
maica,  in  the  summer  of  1791  -William  Rattray,  a  carpenter  at  the 
port  of  Rio  Bueno,  in  a  fit  of  drunkenness,  threw  an  axe  at  a  negro 
boy,  his  own  slave,  which  unfortunately  killed  him  on  the  spot.  The 
coroner’s  inquest  finding  it  wilful  murder,  the  man  was  apprehended, 
and  sent  to  jail  in  irons.  He  was  not,  it  is  true,  publickly  tried,  and 
hanged  for  the  crime;  for  being  well  assured  that  such  would  be  his 
fate,  he  thought  it  best  to  execute  justice  on  himself,  and  found  in 
suicide  an  escape  from  the  gallow3.  This  fact,  which  is  within  my 
own  knowledge,  is  certainly  no  proof  that  the  murderers  pf  their  own 
slaves  escape  with  impunity. 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  V.] 


357 


tioned,  that  the  evidence  of  the  slave  cannot  be 
admitted  against  a  white  person,  even  in  cases  of 
the  most  atrocious  injury.  This  is  an  evil  to  which, 
on  several  accounts,  I  fear  no  direct  and  efficacious 
remedy  can  be  applied.  In  some  of  the  islands, 
however,  attempts  have  been  made,  with  an  ear¬ 
nestness  suited  to  the  importance  of  the  subject, 
to  supply  the  defect;  and  expedients  have  been 
adopted  for  that  purpose,  which  in  most  cases,  it 
may  be  hoped,  will  have  the  good  consequence  of 
a  solid  protection.  By  the  new  slave  act  of  Grena¬ 
da,  the  justices  are  required  annually  to  nominate 
three  freeholders  to  be  guardians  of  the  slaves  ;  who 
are  to  take  an  oath  to  see  the  law  duly  executed. 
They  are  not  only  to  inspect  the  provision-grounds, 
the  cloathing  and  maintenance,  and  to  inquire  into 
the  general  treatment  of  the  slaves,  but  also,  to  in¬ 
terrogate  on  oath  the  managers  and  overseers,  con¬ 
cerning  the  due  observance  of  the  law;  and  in 
case  of  breaches  thereof,  to  prosecute  the  offend¬ 
ers.  Of  this  measure,  the  report  of  the  privy  coun¬ 
cil  expresses  the  highest  approbation: — “The  obli¬ 
ging  managers  and  overseers  (it  observes)  to  answer 
upon  oath ,  gives  peculiar  efficacy  to  a  regulation 
intended  for  the  benefit  of  persons  whose  testimo¬ 
ny,  by  the  law  of  the  country,  could  not  be  heard 
in  a  prosecution  against  a  white  person.” 


In  the  same  liberal  spirit,  and  co-operating  to 
the  same  generous  end,  the  legislature  of  Jamaica 
have  constituted  the  justices  and  vestry  of  each  pa¬ 
rish  in  that  island,  a  council  of  protection ,  express- 


35 S  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  r-v. 

3y  for  the  purpose  of  making  full  inquiry  into  the 
barbarities  exercised  on  slaves,  and  bringing  the  au¬ 
thors  to  punishment  at  the  public  expense.  With 
this  view,  it  is  enacted,  that  when  any  complaint, 
or  probable  intelligence  from  any  slave ,  or  otherwise, 
is  made  before  a  justice  of  the  peace,  of  the  muti¬ 
lation  and  confinement  of  a  slave,  the  justice  is  im- 
powered  and  required  to  issue  his  warrant  to  bring 
the  slave  before  him  for  inspection.  u  By  this  re¬ 
gulation  (say  the  assembly)  it  is  intended,  as  tar  as 
possible,  to  take  from  the  owner  the  power  of  con¬ 
cealment;  for  the  magistrate  is  enabled  to  obtain 
a  view  of  the  fact,  on  evidence,  which,  in  other 
cases,  is,  and  ought  to  be  inadmissible.”  By  ano¬ 
ther  clause  in  the  same  act,  in  order  more  effectu¬ 
ally  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  negroes  by  ex¬ 
cessive  labour  and  unreasonable  punishments,  the 
surgeon  of  every  plantation  is  required  to  produce, 
and  deliver  in  upon  oath,  to  the  justices  and  vestry, 
an  annual  account  of  the  decrease  and  increase  of 
the  slaves  of  such  plantation,  assigning  also  the 
causes  of  stich  decrease,  to  the  best  of  his  judg¬ 
ment  and  belief.  On  this  head  the  assembly  remark, 
“how  tender  and  cautious  every  rational  manager 
must  necessarily  be  in  the  punishments  which  he 
administers,  who  considers,  that  he  has  a  resident 
inspector  into  his  conduct,  and  that  the  punishment 
of  death  may  follow  an  abuse  of  his  authority.” 

Such  are  a  few  of  the  many  forcible  and  decisive 
testimonies,  which  the  resident  planters  in  the  West 
Indies  have  given  to  the  world,  of  their  just  abhor- 


WEST  INDIES. 


359 


CHAP.  V.] 

rence  of  all  acts  of  cruelty  and  oppression  towards 
the  poor  people,  over  whom  the  accident  of  birth 
or  fortune  have  invested  them  with  power. — They 
have  demonstrated)  that  their  inclination  concurs 
with  their  interest,  effectually  to  perform  whatever 
humanity,  and  the  sense  of  reciprocal  obligation, 
require  towards  their  African  labourers;  and  they 
have  armed  the  law  with  additional  energy,  in  the 
hope  of  curbing  those  passions,  suppressing  those 
frailties,  and  preventing  those  excesses,  which  the 
plenitude  of  power  is  too  apt  to  encourage.  It 
this  effect  cannot,  in  all  cases  and  contingencies, 
be  produced,  the  failure  must  be  comprized  among 
the  many  other  insurmountable  difficulties  and  kre- 
sistible  evils  of  life,  for  which  human  wisdom  has 
hitherto  in  vain  sought  a  remedy. 

The  grand  (and  I  admit  the  most  plausible)  ac¬ 
cusation  against  the  general  conduct  of  the  plant¬ 
ers,  arises  from  the  necessity  they  find  themselves 
under  of  having  an  annual  recruit  of  slaves  from 
Africa,  to  fill  up  the  numbers  that  perish  in  the 
West  Indies.  So  long  as  it  shall  appear  that  the 
natural  increase  of  the  negroes  already  in  the  sugar 
islands,  is  insufficient  for  this  purpose,  it  will  be 
contended,  that  this  circumstance,  of  itself,  affords 
an  obvious  and  undeniable  proof,  that  it  is  not  to  in¬ 
dividuals  alone,  the  blame  of  improper  treatment 
ought  to  be  attributed.  That  power,  it  is  urged, 
must  in  almost  all  eases  be  abused,  and  that  slavery 
must  be  universally  excessive,  which  give  occasion 
to  so  dreadful  a  waste  of  life.  The  objection  has 


/ 


360  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

been  anticipated,  and  in  part  answered,  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  pages,  by  the  proof  that  has  been  given  of 
the  great  disproportion  of  the  sexes  in  the  yearly 
importations  from  Africa.  It  has  been  shewn  from 
unquestionable  authority,  that  one-third  only  are 
females.  Thus,  notwithstanding  every  allowance 
for  the  creoles  or  natives,  who  may  reasonably  be 
supposed  to  have  increased  according  to  the  gene¬ 
ral  laws  of  nature,  there  was  in  the  year  1789,  in 
Jamaica  alone,  an  excess  in  its  negro  population  of 
30,000  males.  But  this  is  not  the  whole  extent  of 
the  evil.  It  is  a  truth  well  known,  that  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  polygamy,  which  universally  prevails  in 
Africa,  is  also  very  generally  adopted  among  the 
negroes  in  the  West  Indies;  and  he  who  conceives 
that  a  remedy  may  be  found  for  this,  by  introdu¬ 
cing  among  them  the  laws  of  marriage  as  establish¬ 
ed  in  Europe,  is  utterly  ignorant  of  their  manners, 
propensities  and  superstitions.  It  is  reckoned  in 
Jamaica,  on  a  moderate  computation,  that  not  less 
than  ten  thousand  of  such  as  are  called  head  ne¬ 
groes  (artificers  and  others)  possess  from  twTo  to 
four  wives.  This  partial  appropriation  of  the  wo¬ 
men  creates  a  still  greater  proportion  of  single 
men,  and  produces  all  the  mischiefs  which  are  ne¬ 
cessarily  attached  to  the  system  of  polygamy.  In 
Africa,  the  redundancy  of  males,  occasioned  by  an 
unequal  distribution  of  the  females,  is  undoubtedly 
one  of  the  sources  which  supplies  the  European 
trader  with  slaves;  and  the  consequences  attending 
it  among  the  negroes  in  the  West  Indies,  are  a 
shocking  licentiousness  and  profligacy  of  manners 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  361 

in  most  of  their  women  3  who  are  exposed  to 
temptations  which  they  cannot  resist.  They  hold 
chastity  in  so  little  estimation,  that  barrenness,  and 
frequent  abortions,  the  usual  effects  of  a  promiscu¬ 
ous  intercourse,  are  very  generally  prevalent  among 
them.  To  the  same  origin  may  be  ascribed  that 
neglect,  and  want  of  maternal  affection  towards 
the  children  produced  by  former  connections,  ob¬ 
servable  in  many  of  the  black  females. 

The  circumstances  thus  enumerated,  operating 
with  combined  energy,  are  abundantly  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  annual  diminution  in  the  number  of 
the  slaves  3  and  I  see  no  good  reason  why  it  should 
not  be  frnakly  admitted,  that  slavery  itself,  in  its 
mildest  form,  is  unfriendly  to  population.  The  hu¬ 
man  race,  to  increase  in  numbers,  must  be  placed  in 
favourable  circumstances  3  and,  unless  reason  and 
sentiment  in  some  degree  co-operate  with  corpo¬ 
real  instinct,  its  offspring  is  born  but  to  perish. 
Among  men  who  are  deprived  of  free  agency,  or 
by  whom  it  is  but  imperfectly  enjoyed,  neither  rea¬ 
son  nor  sentiment  can  be  the  ruling  principle.  It  is 
needless  to  pursue  this  argument  any  farther.  Men 
of  reflection,  apprised  of  the  fact  that  such  dispro¬ 
portion  between  the  sexes  exists  among  the  ne¬ 
groes,  will  draw  the  proper  conclusions  from  it, 
and  agree  that  an  abolition  of  the  slave  trade  will 
not  afford  a  remedy. 

Thus  have  I  delivered,  in  a  detail  which  the 
reader  will  probably  find  too  diffuse  and  minute, 
Vol.  IT. 


t  z 


.362  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book,  it. 

such  observations  as  have  occurred  to  me  on  the 
several  matters,  of  which  I  proposed  to  treat.  I 
have  declined  to  enlarge  on  the  various  calumnies* 
and  gross  misrepresentations,  which  have  been 
spread  and  encouraged  against  the  planters,  be- 
cause  it  is  their  misfortune  that,  on  this  question, 
many  virtuous,  humane,  and  pious  men,  misled  by 
popular  prejudice,  openly  concur  in,  and  give  their 
sanction  to,  the  malignant  efforts,  and  uncharitable 
misconstructions  of  the  envious  and  illiberal.  Such 
proceedings,  however,  are  as  impolitic  as  they  are 
unjust.  They  are  equally  injurious  to  the  master  and 
the  slave.  By  exciting  among  the  negroes  a  spirit  of 
discontent  and  disobedience,  they  compel,  in  many 
cases,  the  benevolent  man  to  restrain  that  hand 
which  otherwise  would  be  stretched  out  for  their 
relief;  and  thus,  by  rendering  their  masters  odious 
in  their  eyes,  these  unfortunate  people  (apprized  at 
the  same  time  that  they  are  held  in  a  subjection 
which  is  reprobated  in  the  mother  country)  may  be 
led  to  make  a  general  struggle  for  freedom,  through 
desolation  and  bloodshed.  Far  be  it  from  me,  howe¬ 
ver,  to  impute  motives  so  atrocious  to  any  of  those 
respectable  characters,  whose  exertions  for  an  aboli¬ 
tion  of  the  slave  trade  are  at  this  time  the  object  of 
public  attention.  Most  of  these  gentlemen,  with¬ 
out  doubt,  consider  this  measure  as  only  the  first 
process  in  a  more  extended  and  liberal  plan,  which 
has  for  its  object,  by  stopping  the  further  influx  of 
negroes  into  our  islands,  to  compel  the  planters  to 
cherish  and  husband  their  present  stock;  and  sus¬ 
tain  it  in  future  by  natural  increase;  until,  by  mild- 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  363 

er  treatment,  and  the  Christian  institutes,  the  man¬ 
ners  of  the  slaves  shall  become  softened,  their 
vices  corrected,  and  their  dispositions  gradually  pre¬ 
pared  for  a  total  emancipation  from  that  absolute 
slavery  in  which  they  are  now  held.  Such  is  the 
language,  and  I  doubt  not,  the  fond  expectation 
of  many  wise  and  excellent  persons.  They  consi¬ 
der  that  all  this  will  be  the  necessary  effect  of  the  in¬ 
terposition  of  parliament,  in  prohibiting  the  further 
importation  of  African  slaves  into  our  colonies.  I 
have  assigned  such  reasons  as  occur  to  me  for  be¬ 
lieving,  that  this  conclusion  is  founded  in  error,  and 
will  terminate  in  disappointment.  That  I  am  no 
friend  to  slavery,  in  any  shape,  or  under  any  modi¬ 
fication,  I  feel  a  conscious  assurance  in  my  own 
bosom.  Yet,  that  the  slavery  of  some  part  of  the 
human  species,  in  a  very  abject  degree,  has  exist¬ 
ed  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  among  the  most  civi¬ 
lised,  as  well  as  the  most  barbarous  nations,  no 
man  who  has  consulted  the  records  of  history  dis¬ 
putes.  Perhaps,  like  pain,  poverty,  sickness,  and 
sorrow,  and  all  the  various  other  calamities  of  our 
condition,  it  may  have  been  originally  interwoven 
into  the  constitution  of  the  world,  for  purposes  in¬ 
scrutable  to  man.  Of  this  I  am  certain,  that  an 
immediate  emancipation  of  the  slaves  in  the  West 
Indies,  would  involve  both  master  and  slave  in  one 
common  destruction. — Thus  much  however  is  al¬ 
lowed;  the  miseries  we  cannot  wholly  remove,  we 
may  in  some  cases  mitigate.  We  may  alleviate, 
though  we  cannot  cure.  I  have  shewn  that  this 
has  been  attempted,  and  in  many  instances  effect- 


364  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

ed  too,  by  the  planters  themselves.  What  yet  re¬ 
mains  to  be  done,  consistently  with  sound  policy, 
and  a  just  regard  even  to  the  safety  and  happiness 
of  the  negroes  themselves,  is  a  subject  of  deep  and 
difficult  consideration.  Hasty  measures,  however 
humane  in  appearance,  and  plausible  in  theory, 
may  produce  the  most  calamitous  of  all  contests,  a 
bellum  servile;  which  will  probably  never  end  but 
in  the  extermination  of  either  the  whites  or  the 
blacks.  Among  the  great  variety  of  schemes 
which  have  been  offered  for  further  meliorating 
the  condition  of  the  slave,  the  most  obvious  seem 
to  be  these:  First,  to  render  their  labour  certain 
and  determinate:  in  other  words,  to  apportion  to 
each  negro,  according  to  his  strength,  a  specific 
quantity  of  work  to  be  performed  in  a  given  time- 
allowing  to  such  of  them  as  shall  have  finished  their 
task  within  the  time  limited,  the  rest  of  the  dav 

j 

to  themselves,  and  pay  them  wages  for  extra  la¬ 
bour.  This  is  not  always  practicable,  but  when  if 
is,  I  am  inclined  to  think  favourably  of  the  scheme, 
because  it  seems  calculated  to  awaken  a  spirit  of 
emulation  and  industry,  which  the  dread  of  punish¬ 
ment  can  never  produce.  At  the  same  time,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  secure  to  the  negroes  by  law, 
the  little  property  or  peculium  which  their  own  in¬ 
dustry  may  thus  acquire. — A  second  proposal  is  to 
make  them  arbiters  on  the  conduct  of  each  other, 
by  instituting  a  sort  of  juries  among  them  for  the 
trial  of  petty  offences.  It  is  conceived  that  such  a 
measure  will  give  them  right  notions  of  distribu¬ 
tive  justice,  and  operate  powerfully  towards  their 


WEST  INDIES. 


CHAP.  V.] 


3^5 


civilization  and  improvement;  and  I  have  heard  of 
two  instances  in  Jamaica,  in  which  it  has  been  tried 
with  success  5  but  it  is  evidently  a  regulation  that 
must  be  governed  by  circumstances,  and  left  prin¬ 
cipally  to  the  prudence  and  discretion  of  the  own¬ 
er:  an  attempt  to  establish  and  enforce  it  by  law, 
in  their  present  notions  of  right  and  wrong,  would, 
I  fear,  create  inextricable  confusion.  A  third  mea¬ 
sure  has  been  recommended,  of  less  doubtful  effi 
Cacy.  It  is,  to  render  the  sabbath,  what  it  ought 
to  be,  a  day  of  rest  and  religious  improvement;  to 
which  end,  the  markets  on  Sundays  ought  to  be 
suppressed.  They  are  a  disgrace  to  a  Christian 
country;  and  if  a  market  is  found  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  to  encourage  the  negroes  in  labouring  for 
themselves,  some  other  day,  once  a  fortnight,  may 
be  appropriated  for  that  purpose.*  In  the  mean 
time,  instead  of  abolishing  the  slave-trade  by  act  of 
parliament,  further  encouragement  should  be  given 
to  the  importation  of  a  greater  proportion  of  Afri¬ 
can  women,  until  the  sexes  are  become  nearly 
equal;  after  which  it  Is  probable  that,  under  the 
present  humane  and  improved  system  of  laws  and 

*  The  objection  to  this  scheme  is,  that  it  will  deprive  the  planters 
yearly  of  twenty-six  days  labour  of  the  whole  body  of  their  negroes, 
without  producing  the  effect  intended,  as  the  whole  of  each  Sunday 
will,  in  such  cast,  be  spent  in  drunkenness  and  debauchery  at  home. 
If  this  objection  be  well  founded,  let  the  days  which  are  now  given  to 
the  slaves  (exclusive  of  Sundays)  be  the  days  of  market,  and  compel 
them  to  work  in  their  own  gardens  four  or  five  hours  every  Sunday 
morning;  and  attend  divine  service  in  the  afternoon.  Honest  labour 
must  suiely  be  more  pleasing  to  the  Almighty,  as  it  is  certainly  more 
beneficial  to  man,  than  profligacy  and  riot. 


366  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

manners,  their  numbers  may  be  kept  up  by  natu¬ 
ral  increase.  If  this  good  consequence  shall  happily 
be  produced,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  the  slave- 
trade  will  of  itself  gradually  diminish,  and  perhaps 
in  a  few  years  cease  altogether,  and  expire  with¬ 
out  a  struggle. 

Rut  these,  and  all  other  regulations  which  can 
be  devised  for  the  protection  and  improvement  of 
this  unfortunate  class  of  people,  will  be  of  little 
avail,  unless,  as  a  preliminary  measure,  they  shall 
be  exempted  from  the  cruel  hardship  to  which  they 
are  now  frequently  liable,  of  being  sold  by  creditors, 
and  made  subject,  in  a  course  of  administration  by 
executors,  to  the  payment  of  all  debts  both  of  sim¬ 
ple  contract  and  specialty.  This  grievance,  so  re¬ 
morseless  and  tyrannical  in  its  principle,  and  so 
dreadful  in  its  effects,  though  not  originally  crea¬ 
ted,  is  now  upheld  and  confirmed  by  a  British  act 
of  parliament;  and  no  less  authority  is  compe¬ 
tent  to  redress  it.  It  was  an  act  procured  by,  and 
passed  for  the  benefit  of  British  creditors;  and  I 
blush  to  add,  that  its  motive  and  origin  have  sanc¬ 
tified  the  measure,  even  in  the  opinion  of  men  wTho 
are  among  the  loudest  of  the  declaimers  against 
slavery  and  the  slave  trade.*  Thus  the  odious  se- 


*  The  act  alluded  to,  is  the  5  George  II.  c.  7.  entitled,  <c  An  act 
for  the  more  easy  recovery  of  debts  in  his  majesty’s  plantations.”  Of 
the  most  violent  of  the  petitioners  to  parliament,  not  one  has  solicited 
the  repeal  of  this  execrable  statute.  The  society  in  the  Old  Jewry, 
though  apprized  of  the  grievance,  its  origin  and  the  remedy,  are  silent 


chap,  v.]  WEST  INDIES.  367 

verity  of  the  Roman  law,  which  declared  sentient 
beings  to  be  inter  res ,  is  revived  and  perpetuated 
in  a  country  that  pretends  to  Christianity !  In  a  few 
years  a  good  negro  gets  comfortably  established, 
has  built  himself  a  house,  obtained  a  wife,  and  be¬ 
gins  to  see  a  young  family  rising  about  him.  His 
provision-ground,  the  creation  of  his  own  industry, 
and  the  staff  of  his  existence,  affords  him  not  only 
support,  but  the  means  also  of  adding  something 
to  the  mere  necessaries  of  life.  In  this  situation  he 
is  seized  on  by  the  sheriff’s  officer,  forcibly  separa¬ 
ted  from  his  wife  and  children,  dragged  to  public 
auction,  purchased  by  a  stranger,  and  perhaps  sent 
to  terminate  his  miserable  existence  in  the  mines  of 
Mexico,  excluded  for  ever  from  the  light  of  hea¬ 
ven  ;  and  all  this  without  any  crime  or  demerit 
on  his  part,  real  or  pretended.  He  is  punished 
because  his  master  is  unfortunate.  I  do  not  believe, 
that  any  case  of  force  or  fraud  in  Africa  can  be  pro¬ 
ductive  of  greater  misery  than  this!  Neither  can  it 
be  urged,  that,  like  some  unauthorized  cases  of 
cruelty  in  the  West  Indies,  it  occurs  but  seldom : 
unhappily  it  occurs  every  day,  and  under  the  pre¬ 
sent  system  will  continue  to  occur,  so  long  as  men 
shall  continue  to  be  unfortunate. 

Let  this  statute  then  be  totally  repealed.  It  is 
injurious  to  the  national  character;  it  is  disgraceful 
to  humanity.  Let  the  negroes  be  attached  to  the 

cn  the  subject.  They  are  men  of  the  world,  and  with  all  their 
philanthropy,  probably  consider  no  rights  so  sacred  as  those  of  cre¬ 
ditors. 


368  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

land,  and  sold  with  it.  The  good  effect  of  a  simi¬ 
lar  regulation  in  the  system  of  ancient  villanage  has 
been  pointed  out  and  illustrated  by  a  great  many 
writers ;  and  those  persons  who  now  oppose  an  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  same  benefit  to  the  negroes  in  the 
West  Indies,  would  do  well  to  reflect,  that,  while 
they  arraign  the  conduct  of  the  resident  planters 
towards  their  slaves,  they  are  themselves  abettors 
and  supporters  of  the  greatest  of  all  the  grievan¬ 
ces  under  which  those  unfortunate  people  continue 
to  suffer.* 

*  It  is  peculiarly  gratifying  to  the  Author  of  this  work,  that  he  hag 
the  opportunity,  in  the  present  edition,  to  inform  his  readers,  that  in 
June  1797,  he  had  the  honour  and  happiness  as  a  member  of  the  Bri¬ 
tish  parliament,  to  bring  into  the  house  of  commons,  and  to  succeed 
in  carrying  it  into  a  law,  a  bill  to  repeal  so  much  of  the  5  Geo.  II. 
c.  7.  as  relates  to  negroes  in  his  majesty’s  Plantations. 


CiiAP.  V.] 


WEST  INDIES.  369 


§3*  A  valuable  friend,  than  whpni  no  mart  is  better  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  negro  character,  and  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  enslaved  Africans,  has  favoured  me 
with  the  following  observations,  which  occurreq 
to  him  on  a  perusal  of  the  preceding  chapter  in  the 
first  edition. 

u  That  the  treatment  of  the  negroes  in  the  British  West 
Indies,  even  before  what  has  been  lately  done  by  the  eolo* 
nial  assemblies  to  meliorate  their  condition,  was  not  syste¬ 
matically  bad,  is  to  me  convincing  from  this  fact,  which  all 
who  are  acquainted  with  negroes  on  plantations  must  ad¬ 
mit  ;  that  the  Creole  race,  (with  some  few  eminent  excep¬ 
tions),  exceed  the  African  in  intellect,  strength,  and  comeli¬ 
ness,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner.  If  a  better  horse  is 
produced  from  an  inferior  breed,  it  is  fair  to  conclude,  that 
the  colt  has  had  a  better  groom,  and  a  better  pasture,  than 
the  common  on  which  the  dam  usually  fed.  The  great  ob¬ 
ject  to  be  wished  at  present,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is,  to  purify 
the  moral  sense  of  negroes.  Hitherto,  with  all  their  im¬ 
provements,  they  have  caught  from  the  whites,  I  am  afraid, 
more  of  the  vices  than  the  virtues  of  civilization.  Correct 
the  idea,  which  a  negro  may  be  said  to  imbibe  with  his 
mother’s  milk,  that  whatever  he  can  cheat  his  owner  of, 
in  any  direction,  is  clear  gain  to  himself :  Make  the  inte¬ 
rest  of  the  master  and  the  slave  go  hand  in  hand.  Now  I 
think  that  small  wages,  subject  to  stoppage  for  delinquen- 

Vol.  II.  3  a 


370  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  m 

cy,  would  have  this  effect.  Such  a  system  would  be  laying 
a"  foundation  on  which  a  large  superstructure  might  be 
built  in  the  reformation  of  manners.  Even  in  point  of  ex¬ 
pense,  an  estate  can  well  afford  it  ;  for  the  aggregate  of 
time  wasted  in  the  sick- house,  on  the  mere  pretence  of  ill¬ 
ness,  is  equal  to  a  little  fortune  to  every  planter.  When  I 
was  last  in  Jamaica,  I  made  the  experiment  with  a  body  of 
tradesmen,  and  punctually  paid  to  each,  at  the  end  of  the 
week,  (if  a  week’s  work  was  done),  two  bitts.*'  I  he 
effect  m  point  of  labour  was  wonderful,  ana  I  believe,  that 
the  system  would  in  time  have  taught  the  negroes  also, 
that  honesty  was  better  policy  than  thieving,  &c.  and  have 
led,  by  degrees,-  to  consequences  still  more  important  and 
beneficial  both  to  the  master  and  the  slave. 


*  About  one  shilling  English. 


afpendix..]  WEST  INDIES. 


37? 


APPENDIX  TO  BOOK  IV 


NUMBER  I. 

AS  a  supplement  to  such  part  of  the  preceding  book 
ms  relates  to  the  treatment  of  the  negroes  in  the  British 
West  Indies ,  it  is  thought  necessary  to  present  the  reader 
with  the  Consolidated  Slave  Act  of  Jamaica,  pas¬ 
sed  the  2d  of  March  1792.  It  is  presumed,  that  this 
law  will  demonstrate  to  general  conviction,  that  the 
legislature  of  Jamaica,  availing  themselves  as  well  of 
the  reproaches  of  their  enemies,  as  of  the  suggestions 
of  their  f  riends,  have  given  all  possible  encouragement 
to  the  raising  of  negro  children  in  the  island,  and  se¬ 
cured  to  their  labourers  as  much  freedom,  and  as  great 
a  latitude  of  enjoyment  of  the  necessaries,  conveniencies, 
and  comforts  of  life,  as  can  be  done  consistently  with 
their  own  preservation.  The  humane  reader  will  not  com¬ 
plain  of  the  length  of  this  Appendix,  if  he  shall  hereaf¬ 
ter  find,  that  the  other  British  islands  in  the  West  Indies, 
encouraged  by  the  example  before  them,  shall  introduce 
the  benevolent  provisions  of  this  act,  into  their  own  negro 
code. 

*g*  The  chief  alterations  between  this  law  and  that  of  1788,  (which, 
is  now  repealed),  are  printed  in  Italic. 


372 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iy* 


Jamaica,  Jjf. 


An  ACT  to  repeal  an  act.  Intituled  11  An  act  to  repeal  several 
acts  and  clauses  of  acts  respecting  slaves,  and  for  the  better  or¬ 
der  and  government  of  slaves,  and  for  other  purposes  and  also 
to  repeal  the  several  acts  and  clauses  of  acts,  which  were  repealed 
by  the  act  intituled  as  aforesaid  ;  and  for  consolidating,  and 
bringing  into  one  act,  the  several  laws  relating  to  slaves,  and 
for  giving  them  further  protection  and  security;  for  altering  the 
mode  of  trial  of  slaves  charged  with  capital  offences ;  and  for 
other  purposes. 

( Laws  and  clauses  of  laws  to  be  repealed. ) 

WHEREAS  it  is  for  the  public  good,  that  all  the  laws  respect¬ 
ing  the  order  and  government  of  slaves,  should  be  consoli¬ 
dated,  and  brought  into  onfc  law,  in  order  to  prevent  confusion,  and 
that  justice  may  more  effectually  be  executed  respecting  slaves  ;  and 
whereas  it  is  found  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  giving  further  security 
to  slaves,  that  the  mode  of  trial  of  slaves  charged  with  capital  offen¬ 
ces  should  be  altered ;  and  whereas,  in  order  thereto,  it  is  necessary 
that  all  the  herein  after- mentioned  laws,  and  clauses  of  laws,  should 
be  repealed  5  viz.  &c.  &c.  See.  We,  your  majesty’s  dutiful  and  loyal 
subjects,  the  assembly  of  this  your  majesty’s  island  of  Jamaica,  do 
most  humbly  beseech  your  majesty  that  it  may  be  enacted,  Be  it 
therefore  enacted,  by  the  lieutenant  governor,  council,  and  assembly 
of  this  said  island,  and  it  is  hereby  enacted  and  ordained  by  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  same,  That  from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  all 
and  every  the  said  herein  before-mentioned  laws,  and  clauses  of  laws, 
and  every  part  thereof,  be,  and  stand  annulled,  repealed,  and  made 
void,  find  are  hereby  annulled,  repealed,  and  made  void,  to  all  intents 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  373 

and  purposes  whatsoever  ;  any  thing  in  the  said  laws,  and  clauses  of 
laws,  or  in  any  other  law  contained  to  the  contrary,  in  any  wise  not¬ 
withstanding. 

( Proprietors ,  &c.  to  allot  land  for  every  slave,  and  to  allow  him  to 

cultivate  it.) 

II.  And  whereas  nothing  can  contribute  more  to  the  good  order  and 
government  of  slaves  than  the  humanity  of  their  owners,  in  providing 
for  and  supplying  them  with  good  and  wholesome  provisions,  and 
proper  and  sufficient  clothing,  and  ail  such  other  things  as  may  be 
proper  and  necessary  for  them,  during  their  being  in  a  state  of  slave¬ 
ry  :  For  which  end  and  purpose,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  autho¬ 
rity  aforesaid.  That,  from  and  after  the  passing  cf  this  act,  every 
master,  owner,  or  possessor,  of  any  plantation  or  plantations,  pens, 
or  other  lands  whatsoever,  shall  allot  and  appoint  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  land  for  every  slave  he  shall  have  in  possession  upon,  or  belonging 
to,  such  plantation  or  plantations,  pens,  or  other  lands,  as  and  for 
the  proper  ground  of  every  such  slave,  and  allow  such  slave  sufficient 
time  to  work  the  same,  in  order  to  provide  him,  her,  or  themselves, 
with  sufficient  provisions  for  his,  her,  or  their  maintenance  :  and  also, 
all  such  masters,  owners,  or  possessors  of  plantations,  pens,  or  other 
lands,  shall  plant  upon  such  plantations,  pens,  or  other  lands,  in 
ground-provisions,  at  least  one  acre  of  land  for  every  ten  negroes  that 
he  shall  be  possessed  of  on  such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  lands,  over 
and  above  the  negro  grounds  aforesaid;  which  lands  shall  be  kept  up 
in  a  planter-like  condition,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds. 

(Slaves  otherwise  provided  for.) 

III.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  eve¬ 
ry  such  master,  owner  or  possessor,  or  his  or  her  overseer  or  chief  ma¬ 
nager,  shall  personally  inspect  into  the  condition  op'  such  negro -grounds 
once  in  every  month  at  the,  least,  in  order  to  see  that  the  same  are  culti¬ 
vated  and  kept  up  in  a  proper  manner,  of  which  oath  shall  be  made,  as 
in  this  act  is  hereafter  directed.  And  whereas  it  may  happen,  that  in 
many  plantations,  pens,  settlements,  and  towns,  in  this  island, 
there  may  not  belauds  proper  for  the  purposes  aforesaid;  then,  and  in 
that  case,  the  masters,  owners,  or  possessors,  do,  by  some  other 


374 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv, 

ways  and  meahs,  make  good  and  ample  provision  for  ail  such  slaves 
as  they  shall  be  possessed  of,  equal  to  the  value  of  two  shillings  and 
six  pence  currency  per  week,  for  each  slave,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
properly  supported  and  maintained,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds. 

(Owners  obliged  to  pro-vide  for  disabled  slaves.) 

IV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  no 
master,  owner,  or  possessor  of  any  slave  or  slaves,  whether  in  his  or 
her  own  right,  or  as  attorney,  guardian,  trustee,  executor,  or  other¬ 
wise,  shall  discard  or  turn  away  any  such  slave  or  slaves,  on  account 
of  or  by  reason  cf  such  slave  or  slaves  being  rendered  incapable  of 
labour  or  service  to  such  master,  owner,  or  possessor,  by  means  of 
sickness,  age,  or  infirmity  ;  but  every  such  master,  owner,  or  pos¬ 
sessor,  as  afoiesaid,  shall  be,  and  he  is  hereby  obliged,  to  keep  all 
such  slave  or  slaves  upon  his,  her,  or  their  properties,  and  to  find  and 
provide  them  with  wholesome  necessaries  of  life,  and  not  suffer  such 
slave  or  slaves  as  aforesaid  to  be  in  want  thereof,  or  to  wander  about, 
or  become  burthensqme  to  others  for  sustenance,  under  the  penalty  of 
ten  pounds  for  every  such  offence,  to  be  recovered  in  a  summary  man¬ 
ner,  before  any  one  justice  of  the  peace  in  this  island  5  who  is  hereby 
authorized,  empowered,  and  required,  to  cause  such  master,  owner, 
or  possessor,  his,  her,  or  their  attorney  or  agent,  and  such  other  per¬ 
sons  as  he  shall  judge  necessary,  to  be  summoned  before  him,  to  en¬ 
able  him  to  judge  and  determine  of  the  propriety  of  such  information, 
and  whether  such  master,  owner,  or  possessor,  ought  to  incur  the  said 
penalty ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  and  until  such  trial  can  be  had,  the 
said  justice  of  the  peace,  on  his  own  view,  or  upon  the  information  of 
any  white  person,  upon  oath,  is  hereby  empowered  and  required  to 
take  up  such  wandering,  sick,  aged,  or  infirm,  slave,  or  slaves,  and  to 
loJgehim,  her,  or  them,  in  the  nearest  workhouse,  there  to  be  clothed 
and  fed,  but  not  worked,  at  the  expense  of  the  master,  owner,  or 
possessor,  until  such  trial  as  aforesaid  can  be  had  5  and  if  it  shall  ap¬ 
pear  to  the  said  justice,  on  such  trial,  that  the  party  or  parties  so  com¬ 
plained  of  is  or  are  guilty  of  the  said  offence,  and  shall  refuse  to  pay 
the  said  ten  pounds,  and  the  fees  to  such  workhouse  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  together  with  the  charges  of  the  con¬ 
viction,  the  said  justice  is  hereby  required  and  empowered,  under  the 


r 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  37 5 

penalty  of  twenty  pounds,  forthwith,  by  warrant  under  his  hand  and 
seal,  directed  to  the  constable,  to  commit  such  offender  or  offenders 
to  the  common  gaol  of  the  county  or  parish  where  the  offence  shall  be 
committed,  there  to  remain  until  he  or  she  shall  pay  the  said  sum  of 
ten  pounds,  and  charges  as  aforesaid ;  one  moiety  of  which  said  fine 
shall  be  paid  to  the  informer,  and  the  other  moiety  shall  be  paid  into 
the  hands  of  the  churchwardens  of  «uch  parish,  for  the  poor  of  said 
parish;  any  law*  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

( Slaves  to  be  cloatbed  by  their  owner  once  a  year.) 

V.  And,  for  the  better  encouragement  of  slaves  to  do  their  duty  to 
their  masters,  owners,  or  possessors,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  au¬ 
thority  aforesaid,  That  every  master,  owner,  or  possessor  of  slaves, 
shall,  once  in  every  year,  provide  and  give  to  each  slave  they  shall  be 
possessed  of,  proper  and  sufficient  cloathing,  to  be  approved  of  by  the 
justices  and  vestry  of  the  parish  where  such  master,  owner,  or  possess¬ 
or  of  such  slaves  resides,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds. 

( Owners  to  instruct  slaves  in  the  Christian  religion.) 

VI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  all 
masters  and  mistresses,  owners,  or,  in  their  absence,  overseers  of 
slaves,  shall,  as  much  as  in  them  lies,  endeavour  the  instruction  of 
their  slaves  in  the  principles  of  the  Christian  religion,  whereby  to  fa¬ 
cilitate  their  conversion,  and  shall  do  their  utmost  endeavours  to  fit 
them  for  baptism,  and  as  soon  as  conveniently  they  can,  cause  to  be 
baptised  ail  such  as  they  can  make  sensible  of  a  Deity  and  the  Chris¬ 
tian  faith. 

( Ovjners  to  give  in  an  account  of  provision-ground.) 

VII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
every  master,  owner,  proprietor,  or  possessor  of  slaves,  his  or  her 
overseer  or  chief  manager,  at  their  giving  in  an  account  of  their  slaves 
and  stock  to  the  justices  and  vestry,  on  the  twenty  eighth  day  of  De¬ 
cember  in  every  year,  shall,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds  for  every 
neglect,  also  give  in  on  oath,  an  account  of  the  quantity  of  land  in 
ground-provisions,  over  and  above  the  negro-grounds,  upon  such 


376  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv\ 

plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  where  there  are  lands  proper  for 
the  cultivation  of  such  provisions  ;  and,  where  there  are  not  lands 
proper  for  such  purposes,  then  an  account,  on  oath,  of  the  provision 
made  on  such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  or  means  adopted 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  slaves  thereon  ;  and  shall  also,  at  the  same 
time,  and  under  the  like  penalty,  give  in  3n  account,  on  oath,  of  the 
nature  and  quantity  of  the  clothing  actually  served  to  each  slave  on 
Such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  for  the  approbation  of  the 
justices  and  vestry  as  aforesaid  ;  and,  shall  likewise  at  the  same  time 
declare,  on  oath,  that  he  hath  inspected  the  negro-grounds  ( where  such 
grounds  are  allotted)  of  such  plantation,  pen,  or  settlement,  according 
to  the  directions  of  this  act. 

(Premium  to  slaves  for  informing  of  runaways,  &c.) 

VIII,  And  in  order  to  encourage  slaves  for  every  good  and  worthy 
act  that  they  shall  do,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid* 
That  every  slave  or  slaves  that  shall  take  up  any  runaway  slave,  or  in~ 
form  against  any  person  who  shall  have  or  conceal  any  runaway  slave 
or  slaves,  so  that  such  runaway  slave  or  slaves  may  be  taken  and 
restored  to  his  owner  or  owners  j  every  such  slave  or  slaves,  so  in¬ 
forming,  shall  be  entitled  to  such  reward  as  any  justice  shall  in  rea¬ 
son  and  justice  think  just  and  reasonable,  and  be  paid  by  such  person 
or  persons  as  such  justice  shall  determine  ought  to  pay  the  same,  not 
exceeding  twenty  shillings. 

(The  killing  or  apprehending  rebellious  slaves  revoarded.) 

IX.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  if 
any  slave  or  slaves  shall  kill  or  take  any  slave  or  slates  in  actual  re¬ 
bellion,  he  or  they  shall  receive  from  the  churchwardens  of  the  re¬ 
spective  parishes  where  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  have  been  killed,  the 
sum  of  three  pounds,  and  the  sum  of  five  pounds  if  taken  alive,  and 
a  blue  cloth  coat^  with  a  red  cross  on  the  right  shoulder,  to  be  paid 
by  the  churchwardens  of  the  respective  parishes  where  such  slave  or 
slaves  shall  have  been  killed  or  taken;  the  whole  expense  whereof 
shall  be  reimbursed  by  the  receiver- general  for  the  time  being,  out  of 
any  monies  in  his  hands  unappropriated. 


377 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES. 

( Persons  mutilating  slaves  fined  and  imprisoned.) 

( Mutilated  slaves ,  in  certain  cases ,  declared  free.) 

(Justices  to  inquire  into  such  mutilations  and  prosecute  the  offenders.) 

( Ovoners  sued  for  costs.) 

X.  And,  in  order  to  prevent  any  person  from  mutilating  or  dis¬ 
membering  any  slave  or  slaves,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority 
aforesaid.  That  if  any  master,  mistress,  owner,  possessor,  or  other 
person  whatsoever,  shall,  at  his,  her,  or  their  own  will  and  pleasure* 
©r  by  his,  her,  or  their  direction,  or  with  his,  her,  or  their  know- 
3edge,  sufferance,  privity,  or  consent,  mutilate  or  dismember  any 
slave  or  slaves,  he,  she,  or  they,  shall  be  liable  to  be  indicted  for  each 
offence  in  the  supreme  court  of  judicature,  or  in  any  of  the  assize 
courts  of  this  island  ;  and,  upon  conviction,  shall  be  punished  by 
fine,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  pounds,  and  imprisonment,  not  ex¬ 
ceeding  twelve  months,  for  each  and  every  slave  so  mutilated  or  dis¬ 
membered  5  and  such  punishment  is  declared  to  be  without  prejudice 
to  any  action  that  could  or  might  be  brought  at  common  lav;,  for  re¬ 
covery  of  damages  for  or  on  account  of  the  same  :  And,  in  very 
atrocious  cases,  where  the  owner  of  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  con¬ 
victed  of  such  offence,  the  court  before  whom  such  offender  shall  have 
been  tried  and  convicted,  are  hereby  impowered,  in  case  they  shall 
think  it  necessary,  for  the  Future  protection  of  such  slave  or  slaves, 
to  declare  him,  her,  or  them  free,  and  discharged  from  all  manner  or 
servitude,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  whatsoever:  And,  in  all  such 
cases,  the  court  are  hereby  impowered  and  authorised,  if  to  them  it 
shall  appear  necessary,  to  order  and  direct  the  said  fine  of  one  hundred 
pounds  to  be  paid  to  the  justices  and  vestry  of  the  parish  to  which  the 
said  slave  or  slaves  belonged,  to  the  use  of  the  said  parish,  the  said 
justices  and  vestry,  in  consideration  thereof,  paying  to  such  of  the 
said  slave  or  slaves  so  made  free,  the  sum  of  ten  pounds  per  an¬ 
num,  for  his,  her,  or  their  maintenance  and  support  during  life;  and 
in  case  any  slave  «  r  slaves  shall  suffer  any  before  described  mutila¬ 
tions,  such  slave  or  slaves,  on  his,  her,  or  their  application  to  any 
justice  of  the  peace,  the  said  justice  of  the  peace  shall  be,  and  is  here¬ 
by  directed,  required,  and  empowered,  on  view,  and  certain  convic¬ 
tion  of  the  fact,  to  send  such  slave  or  slaves  to  the  nearest  work-house 
where  such  offence  shall  be  committed, 'and  «ucb  slave  or  slaves  shall 
be  there  safely  kept,  and  carefully  attended,  at  the  expense  of  such 

Vol.  II.  3  s 


378  HISTORY  OF  THE  [boos  it, 

parish,  until  such  time  as  there  maybe  a  legal  meeting  of  the  justices' 
ami  vestry  cf  such  parish ;  which  justices  and  vestry  so  met,  are  here¬ 
by  created  and  appointed  a  council  of  protection  of  such  slave  or 
slaves  :  And  the  said  justices  and  vestry,  so  met,  are  hereby.directed 
and  empowered  to  make  further  and  full  inquiry,  upon  view,  into  the 
commitment  of  the  mutilation  of  such  slave  or  slaves  5  and,  if  to 
them  it  shall  appear  proper,  the  said  justices  and  vestry  are  hereby  em¬ 
powered  and  required  to  prosecute  to  effect  such  owner  or  owners  }  the 
expense  of  which  prosecution  shall  be  paid  by  the  parish  where  such 
offence  shall  be  committed  :  And  in  case  the  owner  or  owners  of  such 
slave  or  slaves  shall  appe?r  capable  of  paying  the  costs  and  cnarges  of 
such  before  mentioned  prosecution,  the  said  justices  and  vestry  are 
hereby  empowered  to  commence  suit  or  suits  against  such  owner  or 
owners  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  and  recover  all  costs  and  charges  out  ok 
purse,  by  them  la  d  out  and  expended  in  such  suit  or  suits  :  And  the 
keeper  or  supervisor  of  the  work-house  where  such  mutilated  slave  or 
slaves  shall  have  been  first  committed,  is  hereby  directed  and  required, 
upon  due  notice  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  justices  and  vestry  of  the 
parish  where  the  offence  was  committed,  to  produce  such  mutilated 
slave  or  slaves,  for  the  inspection  and  direction  of  such  justices  and 
vestry,  under  the  penalty  of  twenty  pounds  for  every  neglect,  in  not 
producing  before  such  justices  and  vestry  such  slave  or  slaves. 

(Justices  to  issue  their  warrants  to  bring  mutilated  slaves  before  them.) 

XI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  in 
case  any  justice  of  the  peace  shall  receive  any  complaint  or  probable 
intelligence  from  any  slave  or  otherwise ,  that  any  slave  or  slaves  is  or 
are  so  mutilated,  or  is  or  are  confined  without  sufficient  support,  it  shall 
and  may  be  lawful  for  such  justice  of  the  peace,  and  he  is  hereby  em¬ 
powered  and  required,  forthwith  to  issue  his  warrant  to  any  consta¬ 
ble,  ordering  him  immediately  to  proceed  to  the  place  where  such 
slave  or  slaves,  so  mutilated,  are  confined,  and  such  slave  or  slaves 
to  release  and  bring  before  such  justice,  who,  on  view  of  the  fact,  is 
hereby  authorised  to  send  such  slave  or  slaves  to  the  work-house  for  pro¬ 
tection,  and  who  is  there  to  be  kept,  but  not  to  be  worked,  mtiil  inquiry 
shall  be  made  into  the  fact  according  to  law. 


379 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES. 

(Persons  nvilfully  killing  slaves  to  suffer  death.) 

XII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  if 
any  person  hereafter  shall  wantonly,  willingly,  or  bloody-mindedly 
kill,  or  cause  to  be  killed,  any  negro,  or  other  slave,  such  person  so 
offending  shall,  on  conviction,  be  adjudged  guilty  of  felony,  without 
benefit  of  clergy,  and  shall  suffer  death  accordingly  for  the  said  of¬ 
fence  :  Provided  always,  that  such  conviction  shall  not  extend  to  the 
corrupting  the  blood,  or  the  forfeiture  of  lands  or  tenements,,  goods  or 
chatties;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contrary  thereof,  in  any 
wise  notwithstanding. 

(Persons  cruelly  beating  slaves,  honv  punishable.) 

XIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  any  person  or  persons  that  shall 
wantonly  or  cruelly  whip,  maltreat,  beat,  bruise,  wound,  or  shall 
imprison  or  keep  in  confinement,  without  sufficient  support,  any  slave 
or  slaves,  shall  be  subject  to  be  indicted  for  the  same  in  the  supreme 
court  of  judicature,  or  in  either  of  the  courts  of  assize,  or  courts  of 
quarter  sessions  in  this  island;  and,  upon  being  thereof  legally  con¬ 
victed,  he,  she,  or  they,  shall  suffer  such  punishment,  byfineorimr 
prisoninent,  or  both ,  as  the  judges  or  justices  of  such  courts  shall 
think  proper  to  inflict;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contrary 
in  any  wise  notwithstanding  :  And  such  punishment  is  hereby  decla  - 
red  to  be  without  prejudice  to  any  action  at  common  law  that  could 
or  might  be  brought  for  the  recovery  of  damages  for  and  on  account 
of  the  same,  in  case  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  not  be  the  property  of 
the  offender. 

{Arbitrary  punishment  restrained .) 

XIV.  And  in  order  to  restrain  arbitrary  punishments.  Be  it  further 
enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  no  slave  on  any  plantation  or 
settlement,  or  in  any  of  the  work-houses  or  gaols  in, this  island,  shall 
receive  more  than  ten  lashes  at  one  time  and  for  one  offence,  unless 
the  owner,  attorney,  guardian,  executor,  or  administrator,  or  over¬ 
seer,  of  such  plantation  or  settlement,  having  such  slave  in  his  care, 
or  supervisor  of  such  work-house,  or  keeper  of  such  gaol,  shall  be 
present;  and  that  no  such  owner,  attorney,  guardian,  executor,  ad“ 


3So  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  re. 

ministrator,  or  overseer,  supervisor,  or  gaol-keeper  shall,  on  any  ac_ 
count,  punish  a  slave  with  more  than  thirty-nine  lashes  at  one  time, 
and  for  one  offence,  nor  inflict,  or  suffer  to  be  inflicted,  such  last-men¬ 
tioned  punishment,  nor  any  other  number  of  lashes,  in  the  same  day , 
nor  until  the  delinquent  has  recovered  from  the  effects,  of  any  former 
punishment,  under  the  penalty  of  ten  pounds  for  every  offence,  to  be 
recovered  against  the  person  directing  or  permitting  such  punishment. 

(Putting  iron  collars  or  other  chains  enslaves,  prohibited.) 

XV.  And  vshereas  a  mischievous  practice  hath  sometimes  prevailed 
of  punishing  ill-disposed  slaves,  and  such  as  are  apt  to  abscond  from 
their  owners,  by  fixing  or  causing  to  be  fixed  round  the  necks  of  such 
slaves,  an  iron  collar  with  projecting  bars  or  hooks,  to  prevent  the  fu¬ 
ture  desertion  of  such  slaves ;  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority 
aforesaid,  That  such  practice  is  hereby  declared  to  be  utterly  unlawful , 
and  that  no  person  shall,  on  any  pretence  whatsoever,  under  the  penal¬ 
ty  of  fifty  pounds,  punish  any  negro  or  other  slave,  whether  his  own 
property  or  othervsise ,  by  fixing ,  or  causing  to  be  fixed  any  iron  or  other 
collar  round  the  neck  of  such  slave,  or  by  loading  the  body  or  limbs  of 
such  slave,  for  any  offence  whatsoever,  with  chains,  irons  or  weights , 
of  any  kind,  other  than  such  as  are  absolutely  necessary  for  securing  the 
person  of  such  slave  ;  and  all  and  every  the  justices  of  the  peace,  with¬ 
in  this  island,  are  hereby  authorised,  directed  and  required,  under  the 
penalty  of  one  hundred  pounds ,  on  information  and  view  of  such  offence, 
to  order  such  collar,  chains,  irons ,  or  weights,  to  be  immediately  taken 
off  from  the  slave  or  slaves  wearing  or  bearing  the  same . 

( Justices  and  vestry  to  support  disabled  negroes.) 

(  Hovj  such  slaves  are  disposed  of. ) 

XVI.  And  whereas,  from  the  decease  and  removal  of  residence  of 
many  proprietors  of  slaves,  and  other  circumstances,  and  from  the 
manumission  of  negro,  mulatto,  and  other  slaves,  without  any  suita¬ 
ble  provision  being  made  for  their  future  maintenance,  many  unhap¬ 
py  objects,  afflicted  with  contagious  distempers,  or  disabled  from  la¬ 
bour  by  sickness,  old  age,  and  otherwise,  and,  having  no  owners, 
prove  dangerous,  or  become  a  burthen  and  nuisance  to  the  several 
towns  and  parishes  of  this  island  :  For  remedy  whereof,  Beit  further 
enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  the  justices  and  vestrymen 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  38  s 

of  the  several  towns  and  parishes  in  this  island  be  empowered,  and 
they  are  hereby  empowered,  to  lay  a  tax  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
the  said  said  several  towns  and  parishes,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  parochial  taxes  are  usually  laid,  for  the  purpose  of  raising 
such  a  sum  as  they  shall  judge  sufficient  to  provide  for  the  main¬ 
tenance,  cloathing,  medical  care,  and  attendance,  in  the  work- 
houses  or  other  convenient  places  of  the  said  several  towns  and  pa¬ 
rishes  of  this  island,  of  such  negro,  mulatto,  or  other  -slaves,  or 
other  unhappy  objects  as  aforesaid  :  And  the  magistrates  respectively 
of  such  town  and  parish  are  hereby  empowered  and  required,  upon 
application  being  made  to  them,  or  either  of  them,  to  order  all  such 
objects  as  aforesaid  to  be  removed  and  conveyed  to  the  respective  work- 
houses  of  each  parish,  where  (if  a  slave)  the  former  proprietor  or  pro¬ 
prietors,  owner  or  owners,  of  such  slave  lived  or  resided  ;  or,  if  a 
person, of  colour  made  free,  where  the  person  or  persons  who  manu- 
mised  or  set  free  such  person  of  colour  resided  before  his  decease,  there 
to  be  lodged  and  taken  care  of  as  aforesaid  :  And  the  magistrates  and 
vestries  of  the  several  towns  and  parishes  as  aforesaid,  are  hereby  em¬ 
powered  and  required  to  make  from  time  to  time,  all  such  humane  and 
salutary  regulations,  for  the  purposes  aforesaid,  as  to  them  shall  ap¬ 
pear  necessary  and  expedient, 

(Owners  must  not  allow  their  slaves  to  travel  without  tickets , 
under  penalty.) 

(Penalty  on  neglect  of  duty.) 

XVII.  And  whereas  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  that  the  slaves  in 
this  island  should  be  kept  in  due.  obedience  to  their  owners,  and  in 
due  subordination  to  the  white  people  in  general,  and  as  much  as  in 
the  power  of  the  legislature,  all  means  and  opportunities  of  slaves 
committing  rebellious  conspiracies,  and  other  crimes,  to  the  ruin  and 
destruction  of  the  white  people,  and  others  in  this  inland,  prevented, 
and  that  proper  punishments  should  be  appointed  for  all  crimes  to  be 
by  them  committed,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
That  no  slave,  such  only  excepted  as  are  going  with  firewood,  grass, 
fruit ,  provisions ,  or  small  stock  and  other  goods  which  they  may  law¬ 
fully  sell,  to  market,  and  returning  therefrom ,  shall  hereafter  be  suf¬ 
fered  or  permitted  to  go  out  of  his  or  her  master  or  owner's  plantation 
or  settlement,  or  to  travel  from  one  town  or  place  to  another,  unless 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 


such  slave  shall  have  a  ticket  from  his  master,  owner,  employer,  or 
overseer,  expressing  particularly  the  time  of  such  slave’s  setting  out, 
and  where  he  or  she  is  going,  and  the  time  limited  for  his  or  her  re¬ 
turn,  under  a  penalty  not  exceeding  forty  shillings  for  every  slave  so 
offending,  to  be  recovered  from  the  master,  owner,  employer,  or  over¬ 
seer,  in  a  summary  manner,  before  any  one  justice  of  the  peace,  by 
warrant  of  distress,  complaint  being  made  to  him  upon  oath,  unless 
the  master,  owner,  employer,  or  overseer,  of  such  slave  shall  prove, 
upon  oath,  before  any  justice  of  the  peace  of  the  parish  or  precinct 
where  such  master,  owner,  employer,  or  overseer,  may  or  shall  live 
or  happen  to  be,  that  he  did  give  the  said  slave  such  ticket  as  aforesaid, 
•or  that  such  slave  went  away  without  his  consent ;  and  if  such  justice 
shall  refuse  or  neglect  his  duty,  either  in  causing  the  penalty  to  be 
forthwith  levied,  on  complaint  being  made  to  him  as  aforesaid,  on  the 
owner,  overseer,  or  any  other  person,  who  shall  suffer  a  slave,  being 
under  his  or  their  direction,  to  go  without  a  ticket  as  aforesaid,  eve¬ 
ry  justice  so  offending  shall  forfeit  the  sum  of  five  pounds ;  any  law, 
custom,  or  usage,  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding, 

(  Slaves  allowed  holy  days.) 

XVIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
for  the  future,  all  slaves  in  this  island  shall  be  allowed  the  usual  num¬ 
ber  of  holydays  that  were  allowed  at  the  usual  seasons  of  Christmas., 
Easter,  and  Whitsuntide  :  Provided,  That,  at  every  such  respective 
season,  no  two  holydays  shall  be  allowed  to  follow  or  succeed  imme¬ 
diately  one  after  the  other,  except  at  Christmas,  when  they  shall  he 
allowed  Christmas-day,  and  also  the  day  immediately  succeeding: 
any  law,  custom,  or  usage,  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding  :  And  if 
any  master,  owner,  guardian,  or  attorney,  of  any  plantation  or  set¬ 
tlement,  or  the  overseer  of  such  plantation  or  settlement,  shall  pre¬ 
sume,  at  the  seasons  aforesaid,  to  allow  any  holydays  to  any  slave  be¬ 
longing  to  any  such  plantation  or  settlement,  other  than  as  directed  by 
this  act  to  be  given,  every  person  so  offending,  shall  forfeit  the  sum  of 
five  pounds. 

(Slaves  allowed  one  day  in  every  fortnight.) 

XIX.  And  whereas  it  hath  been  usual  and  customary  with  tbe 
planters  in  this  island,  to  allow  their  slaves  one  day  in  every  fortnight 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  3S3 

to  cultivate  their  cwn  provision-grounds  (exclusive  of  Sundays),  ex¬ 
cept  during  the  time  of  crop  ;  but  the  same  not  being  compulsory,. 
Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  the  slaves  be¬ 
longing  to,  or  employed  on,  every  plantation  or  settlement,  shall, 
over  and  above  the  holydays  herein  before-mentioned,  be  allowed  one 
day  in  every  fortnight,  to  cultivate  tbeir  own  provision-grounds,  ex¬ 
clusive  of  Sundays,  except  during  the  time  of  crop,  under  the  penalty 
of  fifty  pounds,  to  be  recovered  against  the  overseer  or  other  person 
having  the  care  of  such  slaves. 

( Time  allowed  for  breakfast ,  &c.) 

XX.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
every  field-slave  on  such  plantation  or  settlement  shall,  on  work  days, 
be  allowed,  according  to  custom,  half  an  hour  for  breakfast,  and  two 
hours  for  dinner  $  and  that  no  slaves  shall  be  compelled  to  any  man¬ 
ner  of  field-work  upon  the  plantation  before  tbe  hour  of  five  in  the 
morning,  or  after  the  hour  of  seven  at  night,  except  during  the  time 
of  crop,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds,  to  be  recovered  against  the 
overseer,  or  other  person  having  the  care  of  such  slaves. 

{Penalty  for  suffering  unlawful  assemblies  of  slaves.) 

XXI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  master,  owner,  guardian,  or  attorney,  of  any  plantation  or 
settlement,  shall  hereafter  suffer  any  strange  slaves,  exceeding  twelve 
in  number,  to  assemble  together  and  beat  their  military  drums,  or 
blow  their  horns,  or  shells,  upon  any  plantation,  pen,  or  settlement, 
or  in  any  yard  or  place  under  his,  her,  or  their,  care  or  management, 
or  shall  nut  endeavour  to  disperse  or  prevent  the  same,  by  immediate¬ 
ly  giving  notice  thereof  to  the  next  magistrate  or  commissioned  officer 
that  a  proper  force  may  be  sent  to  disperse  the  said  slaves  ;  every  such 
master,  owr,er,  guardian,  or  attorney,  shall,  for  every  such  offence, 
upon  conviction  thereof,  upon  an  indictment  in  the  supreme  court  of 
judicature  or  courts  of  assize,  pay  a  fine  of  fifty  pounds  to  his  majes¬ 
ty,  his  heirs  and  successors,  for  and  towards  the  support  of  the  go¬ 
vernment  of  this  island,  and  the  contingent  charges  thereof :  Provi¬ 
ded  nevertheless.  That  information  of  such  chence  shall  be  made, 
upon  oath,  before  any  of  ins  majesty’s  justices  of  the  peace,  within 
the  space  of  five  days  after  the  commission  of  such  offence. 


384  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

( Civil  or  military  officers  to  suppress  such  assemblies.) 

XXII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
all  officers,  civil  and  military,  shall  be,  and  are  hereby,  empowered 
and  required,  to  enter  into  any  plantation,  settlement,  or  other  places 
to  disperse  all  such  unlawful  assemblies,  and  to  suppress  and  prevent 
all  unlawful  drummings  or  other  noise,  as  before  mentioned  ;  any  law,; 
custom  or  usage  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

(Overseers,  &c.  who  suffer  such  assemblies,  to  be  imprisoned.) 

XXIII.  And  whereas  it  has  been  found  by  experience,  that  rebel¬ 
lions  have  been  often  concerted  at  negro  dances,  and  nightly  meetings 
of  the  slaves  of  different  plantations,  when  such  slaves  are  generally 
intoxicated;  and  as  it  has  been  found  also,  that  those  meetings  tend 
much  to  injure  the  healths  of  negroes ;  Be  it  thererefore  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  That  if  any  overseer,  or  in  his  absence,  any  book¬ 
keeper,  or  other  white  person,  having  the  care  and  management  of  any 
plantation  or  settlement,  shall  suffer  any  slaves  to  assemble  together, 
and  beat  their  military  drums,  or  blow  their  horns  or  shells,  every 
such  overseer,  book-keeper,  or  other  white  person  so  offending,  shall 
for  every  such  offence,  upon  conviction  thereof,  upon  an  indictment 
in  the  supreme  court  of  judicatuse,  or  before  the  justices  of  assize, 
suffer  six  months  imprisonment,  without  bail  or  mainprize  :  Provided 
information  is  made,  upon  oath  as  aforesaid,  before  one  of  his  ma¬ 
jesty’s  justices  of  the  peace,  within  five  days  after  the  commission  of 
such  offence:  And  provided  always  nevertheless,  that  nothing  herein 
contained  shall  be  construed  to  prevent  any  master,  owner,  or  propri¬ 
etor,  of  any  plantation  or  settlement,  or  the  overseer  thereof,  from 
granting  liberty  to  the  slaves  of  such  plantation  or  settlement  only, 
for  assembling  together  upon  such  plantation  or  settlement,  and  play¬ 
ing  and  diverting  themselves  in  any  innocent  amusements,  so  as  they 
do  not  make  use  of  military  drums,  horns,  or  shells  ;  but  that  they 
shall  and  may  grant  such  liberty  when  and  as  often  as  they  please,  any 
thing  in  this,  or  any  other  act,  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding  :  Pro¬ 
vided,  that  such  amusements  are  put  an  end  to  by  twelve  of  the 
clock  at  night. 


APPENDIX.]  WEST  INDIES.  385 

(Negro  burials  to  be  in  day  time.) 

XXIV.  And  in  order  to  prevent  riots  and  nightly  meetings  among 
negro  and  other  slaves ,  to  the  disturbance  of  the  public  peace,  and  the 
endangering  their  healths.  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  afore - 
said,  ’That  all  negro  burials  shall  in  future  take  place  in  the  day  time 
only ,  so  that  the  same  may  be  ended  before  sunset ;  and  if  any  master 
ovmer,  or  possessor  of  slaves,  his  or  her  overseer,  or  chief  manager, 
shall  knowingly  suffer  or  permit  the  burial  of  any  slave  otherwise  than 
as  before  directed,  he  shall  forfeit  the  sum  of fifty  pounds. 

(Imprisonment  for  negroes  suffering  assemblies  at  their  houses.) 

XXV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
it  any  Indian,  free  negro,  or  mulatto,  shall  hereafter  suffer  any  un¬ 
lawful  assembly  of  slaves  at  his  or  her  house  or  settlement,  every 
such  Indian,  free  negro,  or  mulatto,  shall  upon  due  conviction  thereof, 
suffer  imprisonment,  not  exceeding  six  months  ;  Provided  neverthe¬ 
less,  that  information  thereof  shall  be  given  on  oath,  within  five  days 
of  such  unlawful  meeting. 

( Slaves  not  to  keep  fire-arms.) 

XXVI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
all  slaves  who  shall  hereafter  be  found  to  have  in  his  or  their  custody. 

j  ' 

any  fire-arms,  gun-powder,  slugs,  or  ball,  such  slave  being  thereof 
convicted  before  two  justices,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  the  said 
justices  shall  think  proper  to  inflict,  by  whipping  or  hard  labour  in 
the  workhouse,  not  exceeding  the  term  of  six  months. 

( Punishment  on  slaves  offering  violence  to  'whites.) 

XXVII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  slave  shall  offer  any  violence,  By  striking  or  otherwise,  to  any 
white  person,  such  slave,  upon  due  and  proper  proof,  shall  upon  con¬ 
viction,  be  punished  with  death,  transportation,  or  confinement  to  hard 
labour,  not  exceeding  two  years,  or  otherwise,  as  the  court  shall,  in 
their  discretion,  think  proper  to  inflict;  Provided,  such  striking  or 
conflict  be  not  by  command  of  his  or  their  owners,  overseers,  or  per¬ 
sons  intrusted  over  them,  or  in  the  lawful  defence  of  their  owners 
persons  or  goods. 

Vo!.  II.  3  C 


/  ■ 

386  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  it. 

( Punishment  on  slaves  harbouring  slaves .} 

XXVIII,  And  be  it  farther  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
any  slave  or  slaves,  who  shall  knowingly  harbour  or  conceal  any  run¬ 
away  slave  or  slaves,  shall  be  liable  to  be  tried  for  the  same  at  the 
slave  court  hereinafter  appointed,  and  on  conviction,  suffer  such  pu¬ 
nishment  as  the  justices  of  the  said  court  shall  think  proper  to  inflict, 
not  extending  to  life  or  limb. 

( Who  are  deemed  runaways.') 

XXIX.  And  whereas  it  is  very  dangerous  to  the  peace  and  safety  of 
this  island,  to  suffer  slaves  to  continue  out  as  runaways,  and  it  is  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary  to  declare  and  make  known  to  the  public  what 
slaves  shall  be  deemed  such;  Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  authority 
aforesaid,  That  from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  any  slave  or 
slaves  who  shall  be  absent  from  his  owner  or  employer ,  without  leave r 
for  the  space  of  ten  days ,  and  shall  be  found  at  the  distance  of  eight 
miles  from  the  house,  plantation,  or  other  settlement,  towhich  he, 
she,  or  ‘.hey  belong,  without  a  ticket  or  other  permit  to  pass,  except 
as  before  excepted,  in  going  to  and  returning  from  market,  shall  be 
deemed  a  runaway. 

( Reward  for  securing  runavj-ays.) 

XXX,  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  any 
person  whatsoever,  who  shall  apprehend  such  slave  or  slaves,  shall,  for 
every  one  so  apprehended,  be  entitled  to  receive  from  the  owner,  em¬ 
ployer,  overseer,  or  manager  cf  such  slave  or  slaves,  the  sum  of  ten 
shillings,  and  no  more,  besides  mile-money,  at  the  rate  of  one  shilling 
per  mile  for  the  first  five  miles,,  and  six-pence  per  mils  afterwards :  Pro¬ 
vided  such  slave  or  slaves  had  absented  him,  her,  or  themselves,  ten 
days,  without  the  privity,,  knowledge,  or  consent,  of  the  proprietor, 
overseer,  or  other  white-person,  residing  on  the  plantation  or  settlement 
to  which  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  belong ;  which  time  of  absence  of 
such  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  declared  on  the  oath  of  such  proprietor, 
overseer,  or  other  white  person,  as  aforesaid,  if  the  party  taking  up 
such  slave  or  slaves  shall  require  it :  But  it  is  the  true  intent  and  mean¬ 
ing  of  this  act,  that  every  person  cr  persons  who  shall  apprehend  any 
slave  or  slaves,  that  usually  reside  in,  or  are  employed  in,  any  of  the 
towns  of  this  island,  and  that  at  the  time  are  actually  runaway  or  ab- 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  387 

sent  from  their  owner,  employer,  or  manager’s  service,  ten  days,  shall 
be  entitled  to  the  reward  of  ten  shillings,  although  the  slave  or  slaves 
should  not  be  eight  miles  distant  from  their  employer’s  habitation  : 
Provided  nevertheless,  That  nothing  in  this  act  contained,  shall  be 
construed  to  extend  to  an  allowance  of  the  sard  sum  of  ten  shillings 
and  mile-money,  in  addition  to  the  sum  allowed  to  maroon  negroes 
for  apprehending  runaways :  And  provided  also.  That  it  i3  not 
hereby  intended  to  deprive  the  said  maroons  of  their  legal  and  esta¬ 
blished  reward  of  forty  shillings  for  each  negro. 

(How  runaways  are  to  he  disposd  of.) 

XXXI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  person  or  persons  so  apprehending  such  slave  or  slaves,  shall 
convey  him,  her,  or  them,  to  their  respective  owner,  employer,  or 
manager,  or  to  the  workhouse  of  such  parish,  if  any  workhouse  is 
established  there  5  and  in  case  of  there  being  no  workhouse  to  the  next 
goal,  in  case  the  owner,  employer,  or  manager,  of  such  slave  or 
slaves  shall  refuse  to  pay  the  said  sura  of  ten  shillings,  and  mile-mo- 
.ney  as  aforesaid,  or  take  the  oath  as  to  the  time  of  absence  ;  in  which 
■case,  the  goal  or  workhouse-keeper  is  hereby  required  and  ordered  to 
receive  such  slave  or  slaves  into  his  or  their  custody,  and  to  pay  the 
party  delivering  such  slave  or  slaves  the  said  sum  of  ten  shillings,  and 
mile-money  as  aforesaid,  and  no  more,  for  each  slave  so  delivered, 
under  the  penalty  of  five  pounds ;  Provided  nevertheless.  That  if  such 
slave  or  slaves  is  or  are  brought  to  any  gaol  or  workhouse  by  any  white 
person,  free  negro,  free  mulatto,  or  Indian,  no  gaoler  or  workhouse- 
keeper  shall  pay  such  sum  before  such  person  shall  have  taken  an  oath, 
(which  oath  such  gaoler  or  workhouse-keeper  is  hereby  required,  un¬ 
der  the  penalty  of  five  pounds,  to  file  in  his  office  and  produce,  vshen- 
ever  thereunto  required  by  the  owner  or  possessor  of  such  slave  or 
slaves),  that  the  slave  or  slaves  so  apprehended  was  or  were  at  the  re¬ 
puted  distance  of  eight  miles  from  the  house,  plantation,  or  settle¬ 
ment,  to  which  such  slave  or  slaves  do  belong  (except  as  before  is  ex¬ 
cepted),  and  that  such  slave  or  slaves  had  no  ticket  or  other  permit  in 
writing  from  his  master,  mistress,  overseer,  employer,  or  manager, 
at  the  time  such  slave  or  slaves  was  or  were  apprehended,  for  him,  her, 
or  them,  to  pass  unmolested,  and  that  the  said  slave  or  slaves  had 
been  carried  first  to  the  owner,  employer,  or  manager,  of  such  slave 


338  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iV. 

or  slaves  (provided  such  owner,  employer,  or  manager,  shall  be  in 
the  parish  in  which  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  apprehended),  and 
that  the  master,  mistress,  overseer,  or  manager,  had  refused  to  pay 
for  the  apprehending  him,  her,  or  them,  according  to  the  intent  and 
meaning  of  this  act. 

(Time  of  tickets  limited.) 

XXXII.  Ajid  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
no  ticket  shall  be  granted  to  any  slave  or  slaves  for  any  time  exceed¬ 
ing  one  calendar  month. 

(  Account  of  births  and  deaths  must  be  given  in .) 

XXXIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
That  on  the  twenty-eighth  day  of  December  in  every  year  (the  time 
of  giving  in  as  aforesaid),  or  within  thirty  days  after,  the  owner, 
overseer,  or  manager  of  every  plantation,  pen,  or  settlement,  shall 
give  in  on  oath,  an  account  of  all  the  births  and  deaths  of  the  slaves 
of  such  plantation,  pen,  or  settlement,  for  the  preceding  year,  under 
the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds,  to  be  recovered  from  the  owner  of  such 
plantation,  pen  or  other  settlement. 

(Overseer  to  pay  if  his  neglect.) 

XXXIV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That,  if  the  not  giving  in  upon  oath  such  several  accounts  shall  be 
owing  to  the  neglect  of  the  overseer  or  manager  of  such  plantation, 
pen,  or  other  settlement,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful  for  the  owner, 
proprietor,  or  possessor  of  such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement, 
to  stop  and  detain  the  penalty  he  or  she  shall  suffer  by  this  law,  out  of 
the  wages  of  such  overseer  or  manager. 

(Surgeons  to  give  in  an  account  of  slaves  dying.) 

(Encouragement  for  increase  of  slaves.) 

XXXV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
the  doctor  or  surgeon  of  every-  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement, 
shall  on  the  twenty-eighth  day  of  December,  in  every  year  (the  time  of 
giving  in  as  aforesaid)  or  within  thirty  days  after,  give  in  an  account, 
on  oath,  of  the  deaths  of  such  slaves  as  have  died  in  the  preceding  year, 
or  during  such  time  as  such  doctor  or  surgeon  hath  had  the  care  of 


9 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES. 


389 

the  slaves  on  such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  with  the  cause 
of  such  deaths  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  judgment,  and  belief, 
under  the  penalty  of  one  hundred  pounds  for  every  neglect :  And  in 
case  it  shall  appear  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  justices  and  vestry,  from 
the  return  of  the  owner,  overseer,  or  manager  aforesaid,  that  there  has 
been  a  natural  increase  in  the  number  ef  slaves  on  any  such  planta¬ 
tion,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  the  overseer  shall  be  entitled  to  receive 
from  the  owner  or  proprietor  of  such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settle¬ 
ment,  the  sum  of  three  pounds  for  every  slave  born  on  such  plantation? 
pen,  or  other  settlement,  in  the  time  aforesaid,  and  which  shall  be  then 
living  after  deducting  the  decrease  ;  and  the  owner  or  proprietor  of 
such  plantation,  pen,  or  other  settlement,  shall  have  a  deduction  from 
the  first  of  his  or  her  public  taxes  that  shall  become  due  of  the  sum  so 
paid  to  the  overseer,  on  producing  a  certificate  of  the  justices  and 
vestry  of  such  increase,  and  a  receipt  of  the  overseer  for  the  sum  so 
paid. 

(Further  encouragement  for  the  increase  of  slaves.) 

XXXVI.  And,  in  order  that  further  encouragement  may  be  given  to 
the  increase  and  protection  of  negro  infants,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid ,  That  every  female  slave  who  shall  have  six  chil¬ 
dren  living,  shall  be  exempted  frotn  hard  labour  in  the  field  or  otherwise, 
and  the  owner  or  possessor  of  every  such  female  slave  shall  be  exempted 
from  all  manner  of  taxes  for  such  female  slave,  any  thing  in  the  act 
commonly  called  the  poll-tax  law,  or  any  other  of  the  tax  laws  of  this 
island  passed,  or  annually  to  be  passed,  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding  ', 
and  a  deduction  shall  be  made  for  all  such  female  slaves  from  the  taxes 
of  such  owner  or  possessor,  by  certificate  of  the  justices  and  vestry, 
at  the  same  time,  and  in  manner  as  directed  in  the  case  of  an  annual 
increase  oj  the  number  of  slaves  as  aforesaid ;  Provided  nevertheless. 
That  proof  be  given,  on  oath,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  said  justices  and 
vestry,  not  only  that  the  requisite  number  of  children,  together  with  the 
mother,  are  living  5  but  also  that  the  mother  is  exempted from  all  man¬ 
ner  oj  field  or  other  hard  labour,  and  is  provided  with  the  tneans  of  an 
easy  and  comfortable  maintenance . 

( Penalty  on  free  negroes,  &c.  granting  tickets  to  slaves.') 

XXXVII.  And  whereas  the  more  effectually  to  conceal  runaway 
slaves,  or  prevent  their  being  apprehended,  tickets  are  given  by  Indi» 


390  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

ans,  free  negroes,  or  free  mulattoes,  Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  that  any  Indian,  free  negro,  or  mulatto,  granting 
or  giving  such  ticket,  with  such  intent,  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  for* 
gery,  and  shall  be  liable  to  be  tried  for  the  said  offence  before  the  su¬ 
preme  court  of  judicature,  or  in  either  of  the  courts  of  assize  in  this 
island  where  the  offence  shall  be  committed;  and,  on  conviction, 
shall  suffer  the  loss  of  freedom,  transportation,  or  such  other  punish¬ 
ment  as  the  court,  in  their  discretion,  shall  think  proper  to  inflict. 

(Whites  granting  such  tickets  punishable .) 

XXXVIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  if  such  ticket  shall  be  granted  or  given  by  any  white  person, 
with  such  intent  as  aforesaid,  to  any  slave  or  slaves,  before  or  after 
his  or  their  absenting  themselves  from  their  owner,  employer,  over¬ 
seer,  or  manager,  such  white  person  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  forgery, 
and  shall  be  liable  to  be  tried  for  the  same  before  the  supreme  court  of 
judicature,  or  either  of  the  assize  courts  of  this  island,  where  the  of¬ 
fence  shall  be  committed  ;  and  on  conviction,  shall  suffer  such  punish¬ 
ment  as  the  court,  in  their  discretion  shall  think  proper  to  inflict. 

(Keepers  of  gaols ,  &c.  to  advertise  runaway  r, — detain  them  until  paid 
their  fees , — attest  the  charges  for  mile-money ,  6? c.) 

XXXIX.  And  to  the  end  that  the  owners  and  proprietors  of  runa¬ 
way  slaves  may  have  a  due  knowledge  where  such  slaves  are  confined, 
after  their  being  apprehended  and  sent  to  any  workhouse  or  goal  in  this 
island,  in  order  that  such  owners  and  proprietors  may  apply  for  such, 
slaves  ;  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  from 
and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  all  and  every  of  the  keepers  of  the 
workhouses,  or  gaol-keepers,  in  any  of  the  parishes  of  this  island, 
shall,  and  they  are  hereby  obliged,  once  in  every  week,  to  advertise 
in  the  Gazette  of  St.  Jago  de  la  Vega,  the  Royal  Gazette  of  Kingston, 
and  the  Cornwall  Chronicle,  the  heighth,  names,  marks,  and  sex, 
and  also  the  country,  where  the  same  can  be  ascertained,  of  each  and 
every  runaway  slave  then  in  their  custody,  together  with  the  time  of 
their  being  sent  into  custody,  and  the  name  or  names  of  the  owner 
or  owners  thereof,  if  known,  and  that  upon  oath,  under  the  penalty 
of  ten  pounds  for  every  slave  so  neglected  by  him  to  be  advertised  j 
and,  for  the  expense  of  such  advertisement,  they  the  said  workhouse- 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  39 r 

keepers  or  gaol-keepers  shall  and  may,  and  they  are  hereby  authori¬ 
zed  to  charge  the  owner  or  proprietor  of  such  runaway  slaves  so  adver¬ 
tised,  at  and  after  the  rate  of  one  shilling  and  three-pence  per  month 
for  each  paper,  and  no  more;  and  that  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful 
for  the  keeper  of  the  workhouse  or  gaol-keeper,  to  detaift  and  keep  in 
his  or  their  custody  such  runaway  slave  or  slaves  so  brought  unto  him 
or  them,  until  the  owner  or  owners  thereof,  or  some  person  on  their 
behalf,  properly  authorized,  shall  pay  unto  him  or  them  what  he  or 
they  so  paid  to  the  person  or  persons  who  apprehended  and  brought 
such  slave  or  slaves  into  custody,  with  two  shillings  and  six-pence  in 
the  pound  for  laying  out  his  or  their  money,  the  cost  of  advertising, 
after  the  rate  above  mentioned,  and  six-pence  for  every  twenty-four 
hours  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  have  been  in  custody,  for  maintenance, 
and  two  pence  per  day  for  medical  care  and  extraordinary  nourish¬ 
ment  where  necessary,  and  also  the  charges  of  advertising  above  di¬ 
rected,  and  no  other  fees  whatever;  and  that  the  gaoler,  workhouse- 
keeper,  or  supervisor,  and  no  other  person,  shall  attest,  upon  oath,  that 
the  charges  in  the  account  for  mile-money,  and  the  reward  for  appre¬ 
hending  such  slave,  were  actually  paid  to  the  person  who  brought 
such  runaway,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  charges  in  the  said  account 
are  strictly  conformable  to  this  law. 

(Keepers  of  gaols,  &c.  to  allow  them  provisions.) 

XL.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
the  keeper  of  every  workhouse  or  gaol  in  this  island  shall,  under  the 
penalty  of  ten  pounds  for  every  neglect,  provide  and  give  to  every 
slave  confined  in  such  workhouse  or  gaol,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  good 
and  wholesome  provisions  daily  ;  that  is  to  say,  not  less  than  one 
quart  of  unground  Guinea  or  Indian  corn,  or  three  pints  of  the  flour 
or  meal  of  either,  or  three  pints  of  wheat  flour,  or  eight  full-grown 
plantains,  or  eight  pounds  of  cocoas  or  yams,  and  also  one  herring 
or  shad,  or  other  salted  provisions  equal  thereto. 

( Keepers  of  gaols  not  to  hire  them  out.) 

XLI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
no  gaol-keeper  in  this  island,  or  any  person  acting  under  him  as  clerk 
or  deputy,  shall  on  any  pretence  whatsoever,  work  or  employ  any 
slave  or  slaves  sent  to  his  custody,  upon  any  plantation,  pen,  or  set- 


392  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv» 

tlement,  belonging  to  or  in  the  possession  of  any  such  goal-keeper, 
nor  hire  or  lend  such  slave  or  slaves  out  to  work  for  any  other  person 
or  persons,  during  such  time  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  in  his  cus¬ 
tody,  but  that  all  such  slaves  shall  be  and  remain  in  the  common  gaol 
of  the  County  or  parish,  in  order  to  be  inspected  by  any  person  or 
persons  desiring  the  same ;  and  in  case  any  gaol-keeper  shall  offend 
herein,  he  shall,  for  every  offence,  forfeit  the  sum  of  fifty  pounds. 

( Certain  runaways,  how  liable  to  be  punished.) 

XLII.  Aud  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
all  slaves  who  shall  have  been  in  this  island  for  the  space  of  two  years, 
and  shall  run  away,  and  continue  absent  for  a  term  not  exceeding  six 
months,  shall  be  liable  to  be  tried  by  two  justices ;  and,  upon  con¬ 
viction  thereof,  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as 
the  said  justices  shall  think  proper  to  inflict. 

( Runaways  absent  six  months,  how  punishable.) 

XLIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
if  any  slave  shall  run  away  from  his  owner  or  lawful  possessor,  and 
be  absent  for  more  than  six  months,  such  slave,  being  duly  con¬ 
victed  thereof,  shall  be  sentenced  to  be  confined  to  hard  labour  for 
such  time  as  the  court  shall  determine,  or  be  transported  for  life,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  magnitude  of  the  offence. 

( Slaves  guilty  of  Oheab,  how  punishable.) 

XLIV.  And,  in  order  to  prevent  the  many  mischiefs  that  may  here¬ 
after  arise  from  the  wicked  art  of  negroes  going  under  the  appellation 
of  Obeah  men  and  women,  pretending  to  have  communication  with 
the  devil  and  other  evil  spirits,  whereby  the  weak  and  superstitious  are 
deluded  into  a  belief  of  their  having  full  power  to  exempt  them, 
whilst  under  their  protection,  from  any  evils  that  might  otherwise  hap¬ 
pen  ;  Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That,  from 
and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  any  slave  who  shall  pretend  to  any 
supernatural  power,  in  order  to  promote  the  purposes  of  rebellion, 
shall,  upon  conviction  thereof,  suffer  death,  transportation,  or  such 
other  punishment  as  the  court  shall  think  proper  to  direct;  any  thing 
in  this,  or  any  other  act,  to  the  contrary  in  anywise  notwithstanding. 


393 


APPENDIX.]  WEST  INDIES. 

(Slaves  attempting  to  poison,  to  suffer  death.) 

XL V.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  if 
any  negro  or  other  slave  shall  mix  or  prepare,  with  an  intent  to  give, 
or  cause  to  be  given,  any  poison  or  poisonous  drug,  or  shall  actually 
give,  or  cause  to  be  given,  any  such  poison  or  poisonous  drug,  in 
the  practice  of  Obeah  or  otherwise,  although  death  may  not  ensue 
upon  the  taking  thereof,  the  said  slave  or  slaves,  together  with  their 
accessaries,  as  well  before  as  after  the  fact  (being  slaves),  being  duly 
convicted  thereof,  shall  suffer  death,  or  transportation  for  life,  as  the 
court  shall  determine  ;  any  thing  in  this,  or  any  other  act,  to  the  con¬ 
trary  notwithstanding. 

(Slaves  punishable  if  found  in  possession  of  large  quantities  of  fresh 

meat.) 

XLVI.  And  whereas  great  numbers  of  horned  cattle,  sheep,  goats, 
horses,  mares,  mules,  and  asses,  are  frequently  stolen  and  killed  by 
negro  and  other  slaves,  in  so  secret  and  private  a  manner  that  it  is 
with  the  greatest  difficulty  they  can  be  found  out  and  discovered,  in 
Such  manner  as  to  convict  them  of  such  offence,  although  large  quan* 
tity  of  beef,  mutton,  and  the  flesh  of  other  valuable  animals,  are 
found  upon  him,  her,  or  them ;  in  order,  therefore,  to  prevent  such 
evils  in  future,  and  to  punish  the  perpetrators  of  such  acts,  agreeably 
to  their  crimes,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  negro  or  other  slave  shall  fraudulently  have  in  his,  her,  or 
their  custody  or  possession,  unknown  to  his  or  her  master,  owner, 
overseer,  or  other  person,  who  shall  have  the  overlooking  or  employ¬ 
ing  of  such  slave,  any  fresh  beef,  veal,  mutton,  or  goat,  or  the  flesh 
of  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  ass,  in  any  quantity  exceeding  five  and  not 
exceeding  twenty  pounds  weight,  such  negro  or  other  slave,  upon  due 
conviction  thereof  before  any  two  magistrates,  shall  be  whipped  in 
such  manner  as  such  magistrates  shall  direct,  not  exceeding  thirty- 
nine  lashes;  and  if  there  shall  be  found  in  his,  her,  or  their  custody 
or  possession,  a  larger  or  greater  quantity  than  twenty  pounds  weight 
of  fresh  beef,  veal,  mutton,  or  goat,  or  the  flesh  of  horse,  mare, 
mule,  or  ass,  and  such  slave  shall  not  give  a  satisfactory  account  how 
he  or  she  became  possessed  of  such  meat,  that  then  such  negro  or  other 
slave,  upon  conviction  thereof,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  the 

Vol.  IT.  3  r> 


39  4 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iy» 

said  two  justices  shall  think  proper  to  direct,  not  extending  to  life,  or 
imprisonment  for  life. 

( Slaves  stealing  horned  cattle  hocw  punished.) 

XLVII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  negro  or  other  slave  shall,  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  steal 
any  such  horned  cattle,  sheep,  goat,  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  ass,  or 
shall  kill  any  such  horned  cattle,  sheep,  goat,  horse,  mare,  mule,  or 
ass,  with  intent  to  steal  the  whole  carcass  of  any  such  horned  cattle, 
sheep,  goat,  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  ass,  or  any  part  of  the  flesh  there¬ 
of,  such  negro  or  other  slave  shall,  on  convietion  thereof,  suffer 
death,  or  such  other  punishment  as  the  court  shall  think  proper  to  in¬ 
dict. 

( Slaves  guilty  of  crimes  hove  tried.) 

XLVIII.  And  whereas  it  is  necessary  to  declare  how,  and  in  what 
manner,  slaves  shall  be  tried  for  the  several  crimes  which  they  may 
hereafter  commit,  Be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  from 
and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  upon  complaint  made  to  any  justice  of 
the  peace  of  any  felony,  burglary,  robbery,  burning  of  houses,  cane- 
pieces,  rebellious  conspiracies,  compassing  or  imagining  the  death  of 
any  whiteperson  or  persons,  or  any  other  offence  whatsoever  committed 
by  any  slave  or  slave*,  that  shall  subject  such  slave  or  slaves  to  suffer 
death  or  transportation,  such  justice  shall  issue  out  his  warrant  for 
apprehending  such  offender  or  offenders,  and  for  all  persons  to  be 
brought  before  him,  or  any  other  justice  of  the  peace,  that  can  give 
evidence;  and  the  evidence  of  slaves  against  one  another,  in  this  and 
all  other  cases,  snail  be  received;  and  if,  upon  examination,  it  ap¬ 
pears  probable,  that  the  slave  or  slaves  apprehended  is  or  are  guilty, 
the  justice  before  whom  such  examination  shall  be  had  and  taken, 
shall  commit  him,  her,  cr  them,  to  prison,  aid  bind  over  the  wit¬ 
nesses  to  appear  at  a  certain  day,  not  less  than  ten  days  from  the  day 
on  which  the  complaint  shall  be  made,  and  at  the  place  where  the 
quarter  sessions  are  usually  held,  and,  where  there  are  no  quarter 
sessions  held,  at  the  place  where  the  parochial  business  is  usually 
transacted,  and  shall  certify  to  two  other  justices  of  the  peace  the 
cause  of  such  commitment,  and  require  them,  by  virtue  of  this  act, 
to  associate  themselves  to  him,  which  said  justices  are  hereby  severally 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  395 

required  to  do,  under  the  penalty  of  twenty  pounds  for  every  neglect  or 
refusal ;  and  the  said  justices  so  associated,  shall  issue  out  their  war¬ 
rant  to  summon  twelve  persons,  such  as  are  usually  warned  and  im- 
pannelled  to  serve  on  juries  (the  master,  owner,  or  proprietor  of  the 
slave  or  slaves  so  complained  of,  or  the  attorney,  guardian,  trustee, 
overseer,  or  book-keeper  of  such  master,  owner,  or  proprietor,  or  the 
person  prosecuting,  his  or  her  attorney,  guardian,  trustee,  overseer, 
or  book-keeper,  always  excepted),  personally  to  be  and  appear  be¬ 
fore  the  said  justices,  at  the  day  and  place  aforesaid,  to  be  expressed 
in  such  warrant,  and  between  the  hours  of  eight  and  twelve  in  the 
forenoon,  when  and  where  the  said  persons  so  warned  are  hereby  se¬ 
verally  required  to  attend,  under  the  penalty  of  five  pounds ;  and 
when  and  where  the  said  justices  shall  cause  the  said  slave  or  slaves  so 
complained  of  to  be  brought  before  them,  and  thereupon  nine  of  the 
said  persons  so  summoned  as  aforesaid,  shall  compose  a  jury  to  try 
the  said  slave  or  slaves,  and  shall  by  the  said  justices  (the  charge  or 
accusation  being  first  read)  be  sworn  to  try  the  matter  before  them, 
and  to  give  a  true  verdict  according  to  evidence;  and  such  charge  or 
accusation  shall  be  deemed  valid,  if  sufficient  in  substance;  and  if 
the  said  jurors  shall,  upon  hearing  the  evidence,  unanimously  find  the 
said  slave  or  slaves  guilty  of  the  offence  wherewith  he,  she,  or  they 
stand  charged,  the  said  justices  shall  give  sentence  of  death,  without 
benefit  of  clergy,  or  transportation,  or  confinement  to  hard  labour  for 
any  limited  time  not  exceeding  tnxso years,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
offence,  and  shall  cause  such  sentence  to  be  carried  into  execution,  and 
at  such  time  and  place  as  they  shall  think  proper,  women  with  child 
only  excepted,  whose  execution  shall  be  respited  until  a  reasonable 
time  after  delivery:  Provided  always  nevertheless.  That  at  every  court 
of  quarter  sessions  held  in  each  and  every  parish  or  precinct  within 
this  island,  the  justices  there  assembled  shall  and  may,  after  the  usu¬ 
al  business  of  the  said  court  shall  be  done,  form  themselves  into  a 
court,  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into,  hearing  and  determining  all 
manner  of  offences  for  which  any  slave  or  slaves  are  liable  to  be  pu¬ 
nished  with  death,  or  transportation,  or  confinement  to  hard  labour, 
as  aforesaid ,  and  shall  open  the  said  court  by  proclamation,  declaring 
the  same  to  be  a  slave  court  for  such  purpose,  and  shall  thereupon, 
on  the  like  charge  in  writing,  and  in  like  manner,  in  all  other  re¬ 
spects,  as  the  three  justices  associated  and  met  as  herein  before- men- 


j96  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

tioned  are,  by  this  act,  directed  to  proceed  in  the  trial  of  slaves  for 
Such  offences,  proceed  to  try,  and  deliver  the  gaol  or  workhouse  with¬ 
in  the  said  parish  or  precinct,  of  all  and  every  slave  and  slaves  who 
shall  or  may  then  be  in  the  custody  of  the  marshal  or  keeper  of  the  / 
workhouse,  within  each  and  every  parish  or  precinct  as  aforesaid,  and 
shall  forthwith  cause  a  jury,  consisting  of  nine  jurors,  to  be  called 
and  taken  from  the  pannel  returned  to  the  said  court  of  quarter  ses¬ 
sions,  and  shall  cause  them  to  be  severally  sworn,  as  they  shall  appear, 
to  try  all  and  every  such  slave  and  slaves  as  shall  be  brought  before 
them,  charged  with  any  such  offences  as  aforesaid,  and  a  true  verdict 
give  according  to  evidence,  as  in  other  cases. 

(Jurors  to  serve  under  penalty.) 

XLIX.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
all  and  every  the  jurors  who  shall  be  returned  to  serve  as  jurois  at  the 
quarter  sessions,  to  be  holden  as  aforesaid,  are  hereby  requited,  under 
the  penalty  of  five  pounds,  to  be  and  appear  at  the  said  slave-court, 
so  to  be  formed  and  holden  as  aforesaid,  and  to  serve  as  jurors  thereon 
as  they  shall  respectively  be  called  :  Provided  also,  that  nothing  in 
this  act  contained  shall  hinder  or  prevent  the  said  justices,  upon  any 
such  trial,  where  any  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  condemned  to  die,  from 
respiting  the  execution  of  such  sentence  for  any  term  not  exceeding 
thirty  days,  or  until  the  pleasure  of  the  commander  in  chief  shall  be 
known,  in  case  proper  cause  shall  appear  to  them  for  so  doing;  and 
that  if  the  jury  upon  any  such  trial  shall  apply  to  the  said  justices  to 
suspend  the  execution  of  any  sentence  until  the  pleasure  of  the  com¬ 
mander  in  chief  is  known,  the  said  justices  shall  be  obliged  to  sus¬ 
pend  the  same  for  thirty  days,  except  in  cases  of  trial  of  any  slave  or 
slaves  convicted  of  actual  rebellion ;  m  all  which  cases  the  said  justi¬ 
ces  shall,  if  they  think  it  expedient,  order  the  sentence  passed  on  such 
slave  or  slaves  to  be  carried  into  immediate  execution, 

(Three  justices  to  form  a  court.) 

L.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  not 
less  than  three  justices  shall  constitute  a  court  for  the  trial  of  any 
slave  or  slaves  for  any  crime  or  offence  that  shall  subject  such  slave  or 
slaves  to  suffer  death,  transportation^  or  confinement  to  hard  labour 
as  aforesaid j  and  that,  upon  all  such  trials,  no  peremptory  challenges 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  397 

of  any  of  the  said  jurors,  or  any  exception  to  the  form  of  the  indict^ 
ment,  shall  be  allowed. 

(Hovj  executions  are  performed.) 

LI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  in 
all  cases  where  the  punishment  of  death  is  inflicted,  the  execution  shall 
be  performed  in  a  public  part  of  the  parish  and  with  due  solemnity  5 
and  care  shall  be  taken  by  the  gaoler  or  deputy -marshal,  that  the  cri¬ 
minal  is  free  from  intoxication  at  the  time  of  his  trial,  and  from  thence 
to  and  at  the  time  of  his  execution,  under  the  penalty  of  five  pounds  ; 
and  the  mode  of  such  execution  shall  be  hanging  by  the  neck,  and  no 
other;  and  the  body  shall  be  afterwards  disposed  of  in  such  manner 
as  the  court  shall  direct :  And  provided  also,  that  where  several  slaves 
shall  be  capitally  convicted  for  the  same  offence,  one  only  shall  suffer 
death,  except  in  cases  of  murder  or  rebellion. 

(Slaves  giving  false  evidence  bo  vs  punished.) 

LII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  in 
case  any  slave  or  slaves  shall  willfully,  and  with  evil  intent,  give  false 
evidence  in  any  trial  had  under  this  act,  such  slave  or  slaves  being 
thereof  convicted,  shall  suffer  the  same  punishment  as  the  person  or 
persons  on  whose  trial  such  false  evidence  was  given  would,  if  con¬ 
victed,  have  been  liable  to  suffer. 

(Hovj  fees  of  slaves  discharged  by  proclamation  are  paid.) 

LIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
where  any  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  discharged  by  proclamation,  the  de¬ 
puty  marshal  or  workhouse-keeper  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  all  such 
fees  as  shall  be  due  to  him  or  them  for  such  slave  or  slaves  at  the  time 
of  such  discharge,  from  the  public,  upon  application  and  due  proof 
made,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  to  the  assembly,  or  any  committee 
thereof,  and  that  such  slave  or  slaves,  during  the  time  they  were  in 
the  custody  of  such  deputy  marshal  or  workhouse-keeper,  was  and 
were  found  and  provided  with  proper  and  sufficient  provisions  equal 
to  what  is  allowed  by  this  law. 

(Clerk  of  the  peace  to  record  slave  trials.) 

LIV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  a 
record  shall  be  entered  up  of  all  proceedings  on  the  trials  of  slaves,  for 


39S  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

any  crime  that  shall  subject  any  slave  or  slaves  to  suffer  death,  trans¬ 
portation,  or  confinement  to  hard  labour  for  the  term  of  two  years, 
in  a  book  kept  for  that  purpose  by  the  clerk  of  the  peace,  or  his  law¬ 
ful  deputy,  of  the  precinct}  who  is  hereby  obliged  to  attend  all  such 
trials,  and  to  record  the  proceedings  within  thirty  days  after  such 
trial,  under  the  penalty  of  twenty  pounds  for  each  neglect;  and  he 
shall  be  entitled  to  receive  from  the  churchwardens  of  such  parish  the 
sum  of  two  pounds  fifteen  shillings,  and  r,o  more,  for  attending  each 
trial,  entering  up  the  record,  and  any  other  business  incidental  thereto  % 
And  further,  that  the  deputy  marshal  for  the  said  parish,  or  some  pro¬ 
per  person  acting  under  him,  shall  also  be  obliged  to  attend  such  trial, 
under  the  same  penalty  of  twenty  pounds  for  each  neglect  ;  and  that 
he  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  from  the  churchwardens  of  such  parish 
forty  shillings,  for  attending  at  the  trial  and  execution  of  such  offend¬ 
er  as  shall  be  condemned  to  die,  and  no  more. 

(Five  days  notice  of  trial  to  be  given.) 

LV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  in 
all  trials  of  any  slave  or  slaves  under  this  act,  sufficient  notice  of  such 
trial  shall  be  first  given  to  the  owner,  proprietor,  or  possessor  of  such 
slave  or  slaves,  his,  her,  or  their  lawful  attorney  or  attornies,  or 
other  representative  or  representatives  ;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage  to 
the  contrary  notwithstanding, 

(Slaves  executed,  or  transported,  to  be  valued.) 

LVI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That  in 
all  cases  where  any  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  put  upon  his,  her,  or  their 
trial,  and  shall  receive  sentence  of  death  or  transportation,  the  court, 
at  the  time  of  trying  such  slave  or  slaves,  shall  also  inquire  what 
sum  or  sums  of  money  such  owner,  proprietor  or  employer  of  the 
said  slave  or  slaves  ought  to  receive  for  such  slave  or  slaves,  and  cer¬ 
tify  the  same,  so  that  such  sum  or  sums  of  money  do  not  exceed  the 
sxtm  of  sixty  pounds  for  each  slave  sentenced  as  aforesaid. 

(Such  valuation  to  be  paid  by  the  Receiver-general.) 

LVII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
in  all  cases  where  any  slave  or  slaves  shall  be  brought  to  trial,  and 
shall  be  valued  according  to  the  direction  of  this  act,  such  slave  or 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  399 

slaves  shali  be  pa:d  for  by  the  receiver-general  of  this  island,  out  of 
any  monies  in  his  hands  unappropriated  3  and  the  money  arising  from 
the  actual  sale  of  such  slave  or  slaves  as  shall  be  so  transported  by 
the  deputy  marshal  shall  be  accounted  for,  on  oath,  to  the  church¬ 
wardens  of  the  parish  where  the  offence  shall  be  tried,  to  be  by  them 
paid  over  to  the  receiver-general,  for  the  use  of  the  public. 

(Slaves  returning  from  transportation  to  suffer  death.) 

LVIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  negro  or  other  slave,  who  shall  be  transported  from  this  island, 
under  the  direction  of  this  act,  shall  wilfully  return  from  transporta¬ 
tion,  such  negro  or  other  slave  shall,  upon  conviction,  suffer  death 
without  benefit  of  clergy. 

(Punish rnennt  for  inferior  crimes.) 

LIX.  And  whereas  there  are  many  inferior  crimes  and  misdemean¬ 
ours  committed  by  slaves,  which  ought  to  be  punished  in  a  summary 
manner,  by  order  of  the  magistrates  3  Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  That,  from  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  it  shall 
and  may  be  lawful  for  any  two  justices  of  the  peace  to  hear  and  de¬ 
termine,  in  a  summary  manner,  all  such  crimes  and  misdemeanours, 
giving  sufficient  notice  to  the  owner  or  proprietor  of  such  slave  or 
slaves,  or  his  or  her  attorney  or  attornies,  or  the  person  having  the 
care  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  of  the  time  and  place  of  trial,  and  to  or¬ 
der  and  direct  such  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  them  as  such  justices, 
in  their  judgment,  shall  think,  fit,  not  exceeding  fifty  lashes  or  six 
months  confinement  to  hard  labours  the  expenses  of  which  trial  shall 
not  exceed  ten  shillings  to  the  constable,  and  .shall  be  paid  by  the  mas¬ 
ter,  owner  or  employer  of  such  slave  or  slaves  5  and  in  case  such  mas¬ 
ter,  owner,  or  employer  of  such  slave  or  slaves  shall  refuse  or  neglect 
to  pay  such  expenses,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful  for  the  said  justices, 
or  either  of  them,  to  issue  his  or  their  warrant,  under  his  or  their  hand 
and  seal,  directed  to  any  constable,  for  levying  the  same  on  the  goods 
and  chattels  of  such  master,  owner,  or  employer,  and  to  sell  the 
same  at  public  outcry,  for  the  purpose  of  paying  such  expenses,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  charges  attending  the  granting  and  executing  such 
warrant  and  sale  of  goods  and  chattels,  returning  the  overplus,  if  any 
to  the  owner  thereof. 


400 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

( [Provost-marshal  to  deliver  runaways  to  workhouse-keeper .) 

LX.  And  whereas  great  advantages  have  arisen  to  the  community 
from  the  establishment  of  workhouses  in  the  respective  parishes  in  this 
island,  for  the  reception  of  runaway  and  other  slaves  ;  And  whereas 
there  now  are  many  such  slaves  in  the  possession  of  the  provost-mar¬ 
shal,  or  his  lawful  deputies,  who  might  be  employed  in  the  work- 
houses  in  this  island  to  great  advantage;  Be  it  therefore  enacted  by 
the  authority  aforesaid,  That,  from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  it 
shall  and  may  be  lawful  for  the  governors  and  guardians  of  the  respec¬ 
tive  workhouses  in  this  island,  if  to  them  it  shall  seem  meet,  to  demand 
and  receive  from  the  provost-marshal,  or  his  lawful  deputies,  all  or 
any  of  the  runaway  negroes  or  other  slaves  in  his  or  their  possession, 
or  that  may  hereafter  come  into  his  or  their  custody  or  possession, 
upon  the  said  governors  and  guardians  paying  unto  the  provost-mar¬ 
shal,  or  his  lawful  deputies,  the  full  amount  of  the  fees  and  other  con¬ 
tingent  charges  attending  the  said  runaway  slaves  during  the  time  of 
their  being  committed  to  gaol,  agreeably  to  this  or  any  former  act  ; 
and  the  provost-marshal  and  his  lawful  deputies  shall  comply  with 
such  requisitions,  under  the  penalty  of  fifty  pounds, 

(Runaways  to  be  committed  to  workhouse.) 

LXI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
no  runaway  slave  shall,  on  any  account,  be  committed  to  gaol  by  any 
magistrate  of  a  parish  where  there  is  any  workhouse  established,  but 
to  such  workhouse  only. 

(Horses,  &c.  belonging  to  slaves  to  be  taken  up  and  sold.) 

LXII.  And  whereas  the  permitting  and  suffering  negro  and  other 
slaves  to  keep  horses,  mares,  mules,  or  geldings,  is  attended  with 
many  and  great  mischiefs  to  the  island  in  general  ;  In  order,  there¬ 
fore,  to  remedy  the  same,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  afore¬ 
said,  That,  from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  the  master,  owner, 
proprietor,  attorney,  guardian,  executor,  administrator,  or  other  per¬ 
son,  in  possession  of  any  plantation  or  pen  in  this  island,  having  on 
any  such  plantation  or  pen  any  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  the 
reputed  property  of  any  slave  or  slaves,  knowing  the  same  to  be  such, 
shall  cause  them  to  be  taken  up,  and  shall  produce  them  at  the  most 
public  place  in  the  parish  where  taken  up,  at  such  time  as  the  justi- 


/ 


40i 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES. 

cea  and  vestry  shall,  by  advertisement  in  the  public  newspapers,  ap¬ 
point  for  that  purpose,  and  that  such  horses,  mares,  mules,  and  gel¬ 
dings,  be  then  and  there  sold  and  disposed  of  at  public  outcry  ;  and 
if  any  master,  owner,  proprietor,  attorney,  guardian,  executor,  ad¬ 
ministrator  or  other  person  as  aforesaid,  shall  neglect  or  refuse  so  do¬ 
ing,  each  and  every  of  them  shall,  for  every  neglect  or  refusal,  re¬ 
spectively  forfeit  the  sum  of  thirty  pounds,  to  be  recovered  in  a  sum¬ 
mary  manner  before  any  two  justices  of  the  peace  for  the  parish  or 
precinct  where  such  neglect  or  refusal  shall  happen,  by  the  oath  of 
one  or  more  credible  witness  or  witnesses  ;  which  penalty  shall  be  to 
the  use  of  the  person  informing. 

(Penalty  for  permitting  slaves  to  keep  horses.) 

LXIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  no  master,  owner,  proprietor, 
attorney,  guardian,  executor,  administrator,  or  other  person,  in  pos¬ 
session  of  any  plantation,  pen,  or  settlement,  shall  knowingly  per¬ 
mit  or  suffer  any  slave  or  slaves,  to  keep  on  such  plantation,  pen,  or 
settlement,  any  horse,  mare,  mule  or  gelding  ;  and,  in  case  of  so  do¬ 
ing,  shall  for  every  offence,  forfeit  the  sum  of  thirty  pounds,  to  be 
recovered  in  manner  aforesaid. 

{Oath  to  be  made  that  slaves  have  no  property .) 

LXIV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
every  master,  owner,  proprietor,  attorney,  guardian,  executor,  ad¬ 
ministrator,  or  other  person,  at  the  respective  times  of  their  giving  in 
an  account  of  their  slaves  and  stock  to  the  justices  and  vestry,  shall 
also  make  oath,  that  none  of  the  said  horses,  mares,  rnuies,  or  geld¬ 
ings,  so  given  in,  do  belong  to  any  negro  or  other  slave  ;  and  that 
such  person,  so  giving  in,  or  his,  her,  or  their,  employer  or  employ¬ 
ers,  hath  not,  nor  have,  in  his,  her,  or  their  possession,  to  his,  her, 
or  their  knowledge  or  belief,  any  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  be- 
longingto,  or  reputed  to  belong  to,  any  slave  or  slaves;  and  in  case 
any  person  or  persons  shall  neglect  or  refuse  so  to  do,  every  person 
so  neglecting  or  refusing  shall,  for  every  offence,  forfeit  the  sum  of 
thirty  pounds,  to  be  recovered  in  the  same  summary  manner,  and  to 
fee  disposed  of  as  herein  before  mentioned. 

3  E 


Vol.  II. 


402 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

(Slaves  not  to  purchase  horses,  ®Y.) 

LXV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  no  negro  or  other  slave  in  this 
island  shall  purchase  or  buy  any  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  un¬ 
der  the  penalty  of  forfeiting  such  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  and 
to  be  disposed  of  as  herein  before  mentioned:  And  if  any  person 
whatsoever  shall  sell  or  give  any  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  to 
any  negro  or  other  slave,  or  to  any  person  in  trust  for  such  negro  or 
other  slave,  every  such  person  shall,  for  every  such  horse,  mare, 
mule,  or  gelding,  so  sold  or  given,  forfeit  the  sum  of  thirty  pounds ; 
and  every  person  who  shall  purchase,  or  be  concerned  in  the  purchase 
of,  any  horse,  mare,  mule,  or  gelding,  in  trust  for  any  negro  or 
other  slave,  shall  fos  feit  the  sum  of  thirty  pounds  ;  which  said  penal¬ 
ties  shall  be  recovered  in  the  same  summary  manner,  and  disposed  of 
as  herein  before  mentioned  ;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage,  to  the  contra.- 
ry  in  anywise  notwithstanding. 

(. Penalty  for  concealing  slaves  against  whom  warrants  are  issued.) 

LXVI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid.  That 
in  future,  whenever  a  warrant  shall  be  granted  by  one  or  more  of  his 
majesty’s  justices  of  the  peace  against  any  slave,  if  the  said  slave  can¬ 
not  be  immediately  taken  on  the  said  warrant,  the  owner,  possessor 
attorney,  guardian,  or  overseer,  of  such  slave,  shall  be  served  with  a 
copy  of  the  said  warrant;  and  if  he,  she,  or  they,  do  not  ca  ry  the 
said  slave  before  a  magistrate,  to  be  dealt  with  according  to  law  on 
the  said  warrant ;  and  if  it  shall  be  afterwards  proved  that  the  owner, 
possessor,  attorney,  guardian,  or  overseer  of  such  slave,  wilfully  de¬ 
tained  or  concealed  said  slave,  he,  she,  cr  they,  shall  forfeit  the  sum 
of  one  hundred  pounds. 

( Slaves  attempting  to  depart  this  island,  how  punishable.) 

LXVII.  And  whereas  several  slaves  have  lately  found  means  to  de¬ 
sert  from  their  owners,  and  depart  from  this  island,  to  the  great  da¬ 
mage  of  such  owners,  in  evil  example  to  other  slaves,  who  may  there¬ 
by  be  induced  to  attempt  or  conspire  to  do  the  same ;  And  whereas 
there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  such  slaves  have  been  aided  and  assisted 
in  such  escape  and  departure  by  other  persons,  and  there  is  not  any 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  403 

adequate  punishment  provided  by  law  for  such  desertion  and  depar¬ 
ture,  or  attempting  or  conspiring  to  desert  an <1  depart  this  island,  or 
for  persons  aiding,  assisting,  or  abetting,  such  deserters  :  For  reme¬ 
dy  whereof,  Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That, 
from  and  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  if  any  slave  shall  run  away 
from  his,  her,  or  their  owner  or  owners,  employer  or  employers,  and 
gooff  or  conspire  or  attempt  to  go  off  this  island,  in  any  ship,  boat, 
canoe,  or  other  vessel  or  craft  whatsoever,  or  be  aiding,  abetting,  or 
assisting,  to  any  other  slave  or  slaves  in  such  going  off  this  island,  he, 
she  or  they,  so  running  and  going  off,  or  conspiring  or  attempting  to 
go  off,  or  so  aid'ng  assisting  or  abetting,  in  such  going  off,  being 
thereof  convicted,  shall  suffer  death,  or  such  punishment  as  the  said 
court  shall  think  proper  to  direct. 

( Penalty  for  assisting  slaves  to  go  off  the  island.) 

LXVIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  if  any  Indian,  free  negro,  or  mulatto,  shall,  from  and  after 
the  passing  of  this  act,  knowingly  be  aiding,  assisting,  or  abetting, 
any  slave  or  slaves  in  going  off  this  island,  and  shall  be  convicted 
thereof,  either  in  the  supreme  court  or  in  any  of  the  assize  courts  of  this 
island,  such  Indian  free  negro,  or  mulatto,  shall  be  forthwith  trans¬ 
ported  off  this  island  by  the  provost-marshal-general,  or  his  lawful  de¬ 
puty  into  whose  custody  such  person  or  persons  shall  be  committed  ; 
and  if  such  person  or  persons  so  convicted,  sentenced,  and  transport¬ 
ed,  shall  afterwards  be  found  at  large  in  this  island,  he,  she,  or  they, 
being  so  thereof  convicted  before  the  supreme  court  of  judicature  or 
courts  of  assize  in  this  island,  shall  suffer  death  without  benefit  of 
clergy. 

(Penalty  on  whites  for  aiding  slaves  to  go  off  the  island.) 

LXIX.  Aud  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
if  any  white  person  or  persons  shall  knowingly  be  aiding,  assisting, 
or  abetting,  any  slave  or  slaves,  in  going  of  this  island,  he,  she,  or 
they  being  convicted  thereof,  by  bill,  plaint,  or  information,  in  the  su¬ 
preme  court  of  judicature,  or  courts  of  assize,  shad  forfeit  the  sum  or 
one  hundred  pounds  for  each  slave;  one  moiety  whereof  shall  be  to 
our  sovereign  lord  the  king,  his  heirs  and  successors,  for  and  to- 


404 


HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

wards  the  support  of  the  government  of  this  island,  and  the  contingent 
charges  thereof,  and  the  other  moiety  to  the  party  or  parties  at  whose 
suit  or  complaint  such  person  was  convicted,  ana  shall  als,o  suffer  im¬ 
prisonment,  at  the  discretion  of  the  said  court,  for  any  space  of  time 
not  exceeding  twelve  months,  without  bail  or  mainprize. 

( Persons  so  offending  to  be  proceeded  against.') 

LXX.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
it  shall  and  may  be  lawful  to  proceed  against  the  person  or  persons  so 
aiding  assisting  or  abetting,  such  slave  or  slaves  in  going  off  this 
island,  whether  the  principal  or  principals  be  convicted  or  not any 
thing  in  this,  or  any  other  act,  law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contra¬ 
ry  notwithstanding. 

( Overseers  not  to  leave  estates  on  holy  days . ) 

LXXI.  And  wheress  the  overseers  of  estates  in  this  island  matce  a 
frequent  practice  of  leaving  the  several  estates  under  their  care  and 
management,  on  the  respective  seasons  allowed  for  negro  holydays, 
whereby  many  dangerous  meetings  and  pernicious  practices  are  carried 
on  ;  In  order  therefore,  to  prevent  the  like  for  the  future.  Be  it  en¬ 
acted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That  if  any  overseer  in  this  island 
shall  absent  himself  from  the  estate  under  his  care  and  management, 
on  any  of  the  particular  holydays  herein  before  mentioned  to  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  slaves,  without  leave  of  his  employer,  every  such  overseer  so 
offending,  shall,  for  every  offence,  forfeit  the  sum  of  five  pounds,  to 
be  recovered  by  information,  upon  oath,  before  any  justice  of  the 
peace,  in  a  summary  way,  in  the  parish  where  such  offence  shall  hap¬ 
pen  ;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

{Slaves  not  to  be  mutilated .) 

LXXII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any  justice  of  the  peace,  sitting  on  the 
trial  of  any  slave  or  slaves,  or  otherwise,  to  sentence  or  order  any 
slave  to  be  mutilated  or  maimed  for  any  offence  whstsoever. 

( Punishment  on  such  as  escape  from  the  voorkhouse.) 

LXXIII.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  if  any  negro  or  other 
slave  who  may  be  sentenced  to  be  confined  in  the  workhouse  for  the 


appendix.]  WEST  INDIES.  405 

term  of  two  years  or  a  legs  time,  shall  escape  from  such  confinement 
before  the  expiration  of  his  sentence,  such  negro  or  other  slave,  being 
retaken,  shall,  on  proof  of  his  or  her  identity,  before  two  justices  of 
the  peace,  be  adjudged  by  them  to  be  sent  back  to  confinement,  and  to 
receive  a  whipping,  not  exceeding  fifty  lashes. 

( Penalty  for  suffering  slaves  to  escape.) 

LXXIV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
That  if  the  provost-marshal,  or  any  of  his  lawful  deputies,  or  any 
lawful  constable,  or  workhouse-keeper,  shall  willingly  or  negligently 
suffer  any  slave  or  slaves  to  escape,  who  shall  be  committed  to  nis  or 
their  custody  for  any  offence  under  this  act,  so  that  such  slave  or 
slaves  shall  not  be  retaken  within  two  years,  such  marshal,  constable 
or  workhouse-keeper,  who  shall  suffer  such  escape,  shall  forfeit  the 
sum  of  twenty  pounds,  without  injury  to  the  right  of  the  owner  to 
sue  for  the  value  of  the  same. 

( Slaves  not  to  bunt  vjitb  lances ,  &e.) 

LXXV.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
no  negro  or  other  slave  shall  be  allowed  to  hunt  any  cattle,  horses, 
mares,  mules  or  asses,  in  any  part  of  this  island,  with  lances,  guns,  cut¬ 
lasses,  or  other  instruments  of  death,  unless  in  the  company  of  his  or 
their  master,  overseer  or  some  other  white  person  by  him  or  them  de¬ 
puted,  or  by  permission  in  writing;  and  if  any  negro  or  other  slave 
shall  offend,  contrary  to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  this  act,  he  or 
they,  being  thereof  convicted  before  two  justices,  shall  suffer  such 
punishment  as  they  shall  think  proper  to  inflict. 

( Justices  to  do  their  duty  in  martial  lavs .) 

LXXVI.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  That 
it  shall  and  maybe  lawful  for  the  justices  aforesaid,  and  they  are 
hereby  required,  to  do  their  several  and  respective  duties  under  this  act 
when  martial  law  shall  happen  to  be  in  force,  as  they  might  or  ought 
to  have  done  if  martial  law  were  not  subsisting  ;  any  law,  custom,  or 
usage,  to  the  contrary  thereof,  notwithstanding. 

(  Jurors ,  &c.  protected.) 

LXXVII.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  all  jurors  serving  at  slave  courts;  and  every  person  and  persons 


4o 6  HISTORY  OF  THE  [book  iv. 

whose  presence  may  be  requisite,  at  the  examination  of  any  slave  or 
slaves,  or  upon  the  trial  of  any  slave  or  slaves,  and  who  shall  be  re¬ 
quired  to  attend  by  warrant  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  any  justice  of 
the  peace,  and  all  and  every  slave  and  slaves  who  shall  be  brought  as 
witnesses,  shall  be  protected  in  their  persons  fiom  all  mesne  or  judi¬ 
cial  process  whatsoever,  in  their  going  to,  attending  at,  and  returning 
from,  such  examinations  or  trial,  and  that  such  slaves  shall  not  be 
subject  to  be  levied  on. 

(How  penalties  shall  be  recovered,  and  disposed  of.) 

LXXVIII.  Aud  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid. 
That  all  penalties  in  this  act  mentioned,  and  not  already  declared  how 
they  shall  be  recovered  and  applied,  shall,  if  not  exceeding  twenty 
pounds,  be  recovered  in  a  summary  manner  before  any  two  of  his  ma¬ 
jesty’s  justices  of  the  peace,  by  distress  and  sale  of  the  offender’s 
goods  and  chattels ;  and,  if  exceeding  twenty  pounds,  to  be  recover¬ 
ed  in  the  supreme  court  of  judicature  of  this  island,  or  in  either  of 
the  courts  of  assize,  by  action  of  dtebt,  bill,  plaim,  or  information, 
wherein  no  essoin,  protection,  wager  of  law,  or  non  vult  ulterius 
prosequi,  shall  be  entered ;  one  moiety  of  which  penalties  shall  be  to 
the  parish  where  the  offence  is  cornin' tted,  and  the  other  moiety  to  the 
informer,  or  him,  her,  or  them  who  shall  sue  for  the  same. 


NUMBER  II. 


An  Account  of  the  Number  of  Ships,  with  their  Tonnage,  which  cleared  from  Great  Britain 
to  Africa  in  each  Year  from  1700,  together  with  the  Total  Exports  to  Africa  in  each 
Year,  during  the  same  Period ;  distinguishing  the  Value  of  the  British,  India,  and  Fo¬ 
reign  Goods ,  to  which  are  added,  the  Quantity  and  Value  of  each  Article,  from  the 
Year  1782. 