OF 

CHAPTER  I. 

FROM  THE  PERIOD  OF  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  ISLAND,  TO 
THE  YEAR  1600. 

Situation. — General  description. — Discovery  hy  Columhus. — State  of 
theinhahitants. — Anecdote  of  Guaranahari. — A  settlement  formed. 
— Its  demolition  and  re-establishment. — Bottle  with  the  natives. — 
Subjection  of  the  island. — Dissentions  among  the  colonists. — 
Bovadillo  sent  as  governor. — Superceded  by  Ovando. — Columbus 
refused  admmittance. — His  second  visit. — Spanish  oppression  of  the 
natives. — The  Lucayans  .sedxiced  into  slavery. — Diego  Columbus 
obtains  the  government. — Opposition  of  the  Dominicans  to  the  treat' 
nient  of  the  natives. — Albuquerque^s  administration.— -Account  of 
Las  Casas. — Attack  of  Sir  Francis  Drake. — Demolition  of  the 
sea-ports  and  wretched  state  of  the  islanders. 

Between  Porto  Rico  on  the  east,  and  Jamaica  and  Cuba  on 
the  west,  and  at  the  distance  of  about  three  thousand  five  hun- 
dred miles  from  the  Land's  End  in  England,  the  island  of  St. 
Domingo,  the  abode  of  fertility,  and  the  scene  of  important 
political  changes,  appears  upon  the  surface  of  the  Atlantic 
Ocean.  It  extends  one  hundred  and  forty  or  fifty  miles  in 
breadth,  from  north  to  south,  and  about  four  hundred  in  length 
from  east  to  we'st,*  and  lies  in  the  latitude  of  18.  20.  north,  and 
in  longitude  63,  40.  west  from  Greenwich.     It  is  surrounded  by 

*  Edwards  states  the  length  of  the  island  at  three  hundred  and  ninety,  Rains- 
ford  says  it  is  more  than  four  hundred  and  fifty  ;  the  Abbe  Raynal  represents  it  as 
two  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and  sixty,  in  some  places  eighty,  in  breadth  ;  the 
reader  must  judge  between  these  discrepances. 

2 


2  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

rocks  and  dangerous  shoals,  with  the  Bahama  islands  not  far 
distant  in  a  northerly  direction,  while  it  is  bounded  on  the  south 
by  the  Carribbean  sea. 

It  was  originally  called  Hayti,  by  the  natives,  and  afterwards 
Espagnola  or  Hispaniola,  in  honour  of  the  country  which  sent 
out  the  squadron  under  Columbus. 

The  general  salubrity  of  climate,  the  productiveness  of  the 
soil,  and  the  beauty  of  the  scenery — comprising  mountains  of 
prodigious  altitude  and  plains  of  magnificent  extent,  every 
where  well  watered,  and  in  consequence  spread  over  with  the 
most  luxuriant  vegetation — render  this  island  a  most  inviting 
spot ;  and  we  do  not  wonder  that  Columbus  boasted  of  having 
discovered  the  original  seat  of  paradise.  "  In  these  delightful 
vales,  all  the  sweets  of  spring  are  enjoyed  v\iihout  either  winter 
or  suujmer.  There  are  but  two  seasons  in  the  year,  and  they 
are  equally  fine  ;  the  ground  always  laden  with  fruit  and  cover- 
ed with  flowers,  realizes  the  delights  and  riches  of  poetical 
descriptions.  Wherever  we  turn  our  eyes,  we  are  enchanted 
with  a  variety  of  objects.  c<ili)ured  and  reflected  by  the  clearest 
light.  The  air  is  temperate  in  the  day  time,  and  the  nights  are 
constantly  cool."*  The  land  is  generally  considered  as  best 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  city  from  which  the  present  name  of  the 
island  is  derived  :  the  interior  is  now  occupi*  d  by  large  savan- 
nahs or  plains,  scattered  with  wild  swine,  horees,  and  horned 
cattle,  which  have  been  introduced  by  the  Spaniards,  who  bav- 
ins: exterminated  the  natives,  allowed  their  coinestic  animals  to 
run  wild,  and  people  the  wilderness.  From  the  situation  of 
this  island,  it  might  be  supposed  to  suffer  from  intense  heat,  du- 
ring at  least  one  half  the  year,  but  this  is  provided  against  by  an 
easterly  wind  which  blows  with  great  regulaiity  at  certain  sea- 
sons, and  refreshes  what  would  otherwise  prove  a  sultry  and 
oppressive  climate.  This  wind  is  not  much  fek  till  about  nine 
o'clock  in  the  mopning  ;  it  then  increases  as  the  sun  advances 
to  his  meriflian,  and  decreases  as  he  descends  again  to  the  hori- 
zon, and  sinks  with  him. 

*  Raynal's  East  and  West  Indies. 


THE  BEAUTY  OF  THE  ISLAND.  3 

St.  Domingo  is  also  extremely  benefitted  by  frequent  rain, 
especially  during  the  months  of  severest  heat :  the  same  kind 
provision  for  the  comfort  of  man  is  observable  in  most  countries 
within  the  torrid  zone,  and  Providence  has  generally  propor- 
tioned the  supply  to  the  ardour  of  the  climate.  While  this 
remark,  however  applies  generally  to  our  island,  it  is  notorious 
for  the  vaiiety  of  its  climates  as  well  as  of  its  soil.  In  two 
adjoining  districts,  the  one  is  continually  inundated  with  show- 
ers, the  other  almost  as  destitute  of  them.  The  clouds  stop 
at  a  certain  point  as  on  the  line  of  boundary,  whence  they  dis- 
perse into  vapours,  seldom  bestowing  more  than  a  few  drops 
upon  the  thirsty  region  beyond  this  division.  This  difference 
regularly  takes  place  between  the  north  and  south  sides,  and 
at  the  end  of  November  the  south  side,  and  even  the  west 
suffers  extienjely  by  drought,  while  the  northeast  continues 
to  be  favoured  with  abundant  rain.*  Thunder,  which  duiing 
the  summer  is  often  tremendous,  is  seldom  beard  between  the 
months  of  November  and  April.  The  nights  are  very  clear, 
and  the  moon  is  not  only  sufficienily  bright  to  enable  a  person 
to  read,  but  frequently  powerful  enough  to  exhibit  the  rainbow."!* 
Whenever  the  rain  ceases  at  any  place,  the  dew  descends  in  the 
greatest  abundance,  which  is  of  material  consequence  to  vege- 
tation Sometimes  the  cold  is  considerable,  so  that  a  fire  is 
by  no  means  unwelcome. 

But  notwithstanding  what  we  have  remarked  on  the  different 
temperature  of  the  air  in  different  places,  the  inhabitants  can 
scarcely  agree  upon  what  periods  of  the  year  ought  to  be 
designated  winter  and  summer.  Those  who  live  to  the  west  and 
south,  and  midland  parts,  consider  the  time  between  April  and 
November  as  including  the  winter  months  or  season  of  storms; 
the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  districts  reckon  just  the  reverse, 
but  neither  of  them  speak  either  of  spring  or  autumn,  so  sudden 
are  the  transitions. 

It  has  been  found  by  experience,  that  the  island  is  not  favour- 
able to  European  constitutions,  which  usually  decline  under  the 

*  Charlevoix,  Hisf.  de  1'  Isle  Espagnole,  Tom.  1 
t  Charlevoix. 


4  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

combined  influences  of  heat  and  humidity.  Another  cause, 
indeed,  unhappily  exists  to  prevent  their  attaining  that  longevity 
for  which  many  of  the  natives  are  distinguished.  Instead  of  that 
disciphned  temperance  which  is  beneficial  to  life  in  all  places, 
particularly  to  those  who  have  removed  fiom  cold  to  warmer 
climates,  most  of  the  settlers  in  the  West  Indies  have  indulged 
in  luxury  and  dissipation,  in  consequence  of  which,  apart  from 
the  direct  effect  of  the  elements,  they  have  been  usually  hasten- 
ed to  a  premature  grave,  or  have  exposed  themselves  as  a  prey 
to  weakness  and  disease. 

Allliough  a  consiikrable  proportion  of  the  island  is  mountain- 
ous, it  is  every  where  capable  of  cultivation,  in  most  places  even 
to  the  very  summits  of  the  loftiest  bills.  None  are  absolutely 
barren,  though  steep,  and  rising  to  a  great  elevation  ;  especially 
towards  Cape  Tibouron.  Some  of  them  serve  as  embanknients 
against  I  he  octan,  and  ascend  fiom  its  waters  in  high  perpen- 
dicular crags  to  the  extrenie  danger  of  tlie  mariner. 

In  sooje  placesj  after  digging  a  few  feet,  we  meet  with  soft 
gravel  or  sandy  stone,  in  others  with  clay  potter's  earth,  or  a 
bed  of  sand  ;  and  frequently  the  best  soil  is  of  a  considerable 
depth  ;  but  what  at  first  sight  appears  astonishing,  tliis  last  soil  is 
often  found  destitute  of  trees;  but  the  reason  is  obvious — the 
excessive  drought  which  prevails  during  three  or  four  months 
in  the  year  over  the  greatest  part  of  the  island  ;  in  consequence 
of  which  the  soil  cannot  supply  vegetation  wiih  sufficient  nutri- 
ment. It  might  be  imagined  from  this  statement,  that  none  of 
the  larger  species  of  trees  were  to  be  found  upon  the  island  : 
but  it  is  otherwise — for  the  roots  seldom  striking  deeper  into  the 
soil  ihan  two  feet,  diffuse  themselves  in  a  horizontal  direction, 
according  to  the  superincumbent  weight  they  have  to  sustain. 
The  fig-tree  is  the  most  remarkable  for  the  extension  of  its  roots, 
which  sometimes  reach  to  seventy  feet.  The  palm,  on  the 
contrary,  pushes  its  roots  to  a  much  shorter  distance,  but  they 
are  so  numerous  as  equally  to  answer  the  purpose  of  giving 
firmness  and  stability  to  the  tree. 

The  rivers  are  numerous,  though  most  of  them  ought  to  be 
rather  regarded  as  torrents  or  brooks,  which  flow  with  great  ra- 


RIVERS    AND    MINES.  '  5 

pidity.  The  water  is  usually  wholesome,  but  so  cold  that  it 
ought  to  be  drank  with  care,  and  is  dangerous  for  bathing.  There 
are  fifteen  large  streams,  besides  the  six  most  important  rivers  : 
of  which  latter,  Ozama  forms  at  its  mouth  the  port  of  St.  Do- 
mingo, the  Macoris  is  the  most  navigable,  and  the  best  stocked 
with  fish,  the  Yaquey  is  remarkable  for  a  gold  mine  at  its  source, 
and  for  the  particles  of  that  precious  metal  to  be  found  amongst 
its  sands,  the  Una  has  a  copper  mine  at  its  source,  and  is  very 
rapid,  the  Hattibonite  or  Ai  libonite  is  the  largest  and  makes 
the  longest  circuit.     In  the  interior  are  several  small  lakes. 

The  island  is  pre-eminently  distinguished  for  its  mines  of  gold ; 
it  possesses  also  some  of  silver,  copper,  and  iron  :  and  besides 
these  a  variety  of  marble  quarries  and  mines  of  sulphur,  talc, 
and  various  chrystallized  substances.  Numerous  species  of 
stones  are  also  found,  some  of  a  valuable  kind.  The  most  com- 
mon are  fire-stones,  some  of  which  are  white,  and  formed  into 
diamond  points  capable  of  cutting  glass,  very  biiglil  and  dear. 
In  many  places  there  arQ  natural  salt-pits  along  the  coast,  and 
in  one  of  the  mountains  that  enclose  the  lake  Xaragua,  a  mine- 
ral-salt, harder  and  more  corrosive  than  sea  salt  The  Spanish 
historian  Oviedo  slates,  that  the  whole  mountain  is  in  fact  a  rock 
of  salt.  The  island  furnishes  a  variety  of  shells.  Its  birds, 
insects,  fishes,  and  other  peculiarities  are  either  too  well  known 
to  need  enumeration,  or  must  be  left  to  the  ornithologist  and 
others,  to  whom  It  belongs  to  classify  and  describe  them. 

The  sixth  of  December,  1492,  is  the  memorable  date  of  the 
discovery  of  this  remarkable  island.  Columbus  landed  at  a 
small  bay,  which  he  nanred  St.  Nicholas,  whence  he  sailed  along 
the  northern  coast  till  he  arrived  at  a  harbour  which  seemed  to 
ofiTer  him  better  accommodations  than  St.  Nicholas,  and  Vt^here 
he  obtained  an  intercourse  with  the  inhabitants  by  means  of  a 
female  whom  his  people  had  conciliated  with  a  few  presents  j 
he  called  it  Conception. 

The  island  was  at  this  period  divided  into  five  considerable 
kingdoms,  united  in  perfect  amity.  Their  kings  were  denomi- 
nated caziques,  and  seemed  to  have  acquired  an  ascendency 
over  their  subjects,  which  might  be  called  the  tyranny  of  love. 


6  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

The  Spanish  adventurers  found  the  male  inhabitants  naked,  and 
like  most  other  barbarous  people,  addicted  to  painting  their 
bodies:  the  women  were  clothed  in  a  kind  of  cotton  petticoat, 
reaching  down  to  the  knees,  but  the  girls  wore  no  article  of  ap- 
parel. Having  already,  since  the  month  of  October,  become 
acquainted  with  the  neighbouring  islands,  they  had  an  opportu- 
nity of  comparing  the  complexion  of  their  respective  inhabitants, 
and  found  that  those  of  St.  Dofningo  were  the  fairest.  Their 
food  consisted  of  maize,  roots,  fruit,  and  shell-fish,  in  the  use  of 
which  they  observed  great  temperance  :  but  though  naturally 
nimble  and  active  they  were  averse  to  all  laborious  employment, 
which  may  no  doubt  be  accounted  for  by  considering  the 
soothing  warmth  and  benignity  of  the  climate,  and  the  richness 
of  the  soil,  which  superseded  the  necessity  of  any  great  exer- 
tions. Reclining  therefore  in  the  lap  of  ease,  and  on  the  couch 
of  indolence,  diversion  was  their  only  business,  and  sleep  their 
recreation. 

It  can  excite  no  astonishment,  to  find  that  the  Spaniards  re- 
present them  as  of  a  feeble  understanding,  for  what  opportuni- 
ties did  they  possess  for  mental  cultivation  and  improvement.'' 
Mere  ignorance,  however,  in  a  people  divested  of  the  means  of 
acquiring  information  by  books,  or  by  an  extensive  connection 
with  the  world,  is  no  just  criterion  of  their  intellectual  incapaci- 
ty ;  and  it  has  been  actually  seen  in  various  remarkable  instan- 
ces, that  the  degradation  of  mind  and  character  which  has  too 
hastily  been  imputed  to  nations  placed  at  a  distance  from  those 
sources  of  knowledge  which  abound  in  civilized  and  enlightened 
countries,  has  resulted  from  no  other  cause  than  their  unfortu- 
nate circumstances.  True  philosophy  disdains  to  adopt  those 
prejudices  against  nations  which  have  no  better  foundation  than 
accidental  diversities  of  colour,  and  refuses  to  determine  without 
substantial  evidence  and  incontestable  fact,  as  the  basis  of  her 
judgment. 

Most  of  those  amiable  qualities  which  adorn  human  nature  in 
its  improved  state  were  exhibited  by  the  Haytians.  It  appears 
that  all  the  islanders  were  soon  conciliated  with  presents,  and 
were  so  susceptible  of  the  kind  treatment  of  the  strangers  as  to 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  INHABITANTS.  7 

appear  on  shore  without  arms — many  of  them  venturing  on 
board  the  ships  giving  fruits  to  their  visitors,  and  assisting  them 
to  get  on  shore.  In  all  their  conduct  they  evinced  the  very  re- 
verse of  the  malignant  passions ;  in  fact  they  were  gentle  even 
to  indifference  and  dullness,  and  the  worst  part  of  their  mental 
character  was,  that  they  manifested  no  desire  for  improvement. 
All  their  history  was  comprised  in  songs  which  they  had  learned 
in  childhood,  and  in  fables  which,  while  they  amused  the  idle 
hour,  furnished  no  authentic  information.  Some  persons  would 
pronounce  them  happy,  and  so  far  as  the  nature  of  their  situation 
tended  to  preclude  a  multitude  of  evils  which  thrive  in  the  less 
retired -and  less  peaceful  abodes  of  civilization  and  refinement, 
the  terra  may  be  admitted,  supposing  it  to  b*^  employed  only  in 
its  negative  sense  ;  but  as  to  all  positive  enjoyment,  arising  from 
the  enlarged  exercise  of  the  faculties,  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
great  principles  of  morality  and  religion,  they  must  be  pronoun- 
ced destitute  and  wretched.  They  possessed  the  ease  of  lassi- 
tude, but  knew  nothing  of  the  pleasure  and  reward  of  successful 
activity.  Properly  speaking,  therefore,  they  were  only,  not 
miserable. 

Their  domestic  economy  does  not  seem  to  have  been  much 
adapted  to  promote  comfort.  They  had  a  plurality  of  wives, 
although  their  affections  were  usually  concentrated  in  one,  who 
was  beloved  above  the  rest,  yet  without  possessing  any  superior 
authority.  This  distinguished  favourite  would  sometimes  im- 
molate herself  in  the  same  grave  with  her  departed  husband  : 
but  this  was  considered  merely  as  a  sacrifice  to  affection,  and 
not  practised,  as  it  is  in  some  other  parts  of  the  world,  as  a  mat- 
ter of  honour  or  conscience. 

Of  their  religion  little  can  be  ascertained  :  they  are  represent- 
ed as  paying  adoration  to  a  number  of  malevolent  beings,  which, 
if  true,  probably  resulted  from  motives  of  fear  and  superstition. 
It  is  certain  also  that  they  had  sorcerers  among  them. 

An  incident  related  by  Columbus  in  a  report  to  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  of  Spain,  merits  insertion.  When  that  celebrated 
navigator  was  wrecked  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the  island  Gua- 
canahari,  the  cazique,  or  king  of  that  district,  being  informed 


b  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

of  the  disaster,  immediately  expressed  the  gr*»atest  sorrow,  sent 
all  the  people  of  the  place  on  board  in  a  number  of  large  ca- 
noes, who  in  a  short  time  secured  every  thing  which  could  be 
saved  -from  the  shattered  vessel.  "  He  himself,"  says  Colum- 
bus, "  with  his  brother  and  relatives,  took  all  possible  care  that 
every  thing  should  be  properly  done  both  aboard  and  on  shore  : 
and  from  time  to  time  he  sent  some  of  his  relations  weeping,  to 
beg  of  me  not  to  be  dejected,  for  he  would  give  me  all  that  he 
had.  I  can  assure  your  Highnesses  that  so  much  care  would 
not  have  been  taken  of  securing  our  effects  in  any  part  of  Spain  ; 
as  all  our  property  was  put  together  in  one  place  near  his  pal- 
ace, until  the  houses  which  he  Vt'anted  to  prepare  for  Ihe  cus- 
tody of  it  were  emptied,  he  immediately  placed  a  guard  of 
armed  men  who  watched  during  the  whole  night,  and  those  on 
shore  lamented  as  much  as  if  they  had  been  interested  in 
our  los><." 

An  interchange  of  mutual  esteem  and  friendship  was  continu- 
ally carried  on  between  the  islanders  and  their  visiters;  the  for- 
mer regarded  the  latter  as  preternatural  beings,  and  tiie  cazique 
was  extremely  courteous,  presenting  Columbus  with  numerous 
articles  of  curious  workmanship  :  while  the  Spaniards  availed 
themselves  of  the  opportunity  of  exchanging  their  trifles  of 
beads,  knives,  pins,  and  other  articles  for  pieces  of  gold,  of  which 
they  were  in  eager  pursuit,  and  which  the  inhabitants,  without 
any  knowledge  of  their  value  to  the  Europeans,  procured  from 
the  beds  of  rivers,  whither  they  were  brought  down  from  the 
mountains  by  the  stream. 

While,  however,  the  islanders  were  made  sensible  of  the 
friendship  of  the  strangers,  (a  friendsliip  alas!  of  whose  interest- 
ed motive  they  could  form  no  adequate  conception)  they  were 
overawed  by  the  display  of  the  effects  of  aitillery  which  was  giv- 
en in  their  presence  as  a  measure  of  necessary  precaution.  The 
policy  of  the  Spaniards  was  to  induce  the  natives  at  once  to  love 
and  to  fear  them,  and  they  so  far  succeeded  as  to  produce  the 
conviction  that  what  they  presented  to  them  were  sacred  things; 
an  idea  which  their  subsequent  conduct  could  not  eradicate. 
But  we  must  not  too  heartily  condemn  the  Spaniards,  unless  we 


COLUMBUS  LEAVES  THE  ISLAND.  V 

are  willing  to  coniprehend  in  the  well-merited  censure,  the  pro- 
digious multitudes  of  the  designing  and  the  wicked  of  every  age 
and  country,  who  are  perpetually  practising  upon  the  credulity 
of  mankind,  and  congratulating  themselves  but  too  justly  upon 
the  skill  with  which  they  circulate  delusion  and  inflict  pain. 

Columbus  was  soon  placed  in  circumstances  which  rendered 
it  important  to  him  to  form  a  settlement  upon  the  island,  and 
to  depart  for  Spain.  Having  lost  one  of  his  ships,  and  received 
no  intelligence  since  his  arrival  of  another,  the  third  was  insuffi-, 
cient  for  the  whole  of  the  crew,  a  part  of  which,  therefore  he  was 
anxious  to  leave  during  his  voyage  home.  In  this  he  found  no 
difliculty ;  and  selected  accordingly  thirty-eight  or  thirty-nine 
Castllians,  whom  he  entrusted  to  the  command  of  Roderigo  de 
Arado,  or  Arana,  of  Cordova;  promising  to  recommend  them 
to  European  patronage  and  protection.  The  simple-hearted 
Haytians  assisted  in  the  erection  of  the  fort  which  was  to  give 
the  mastery  to  their  wiser  discoverers ;  and  Columbus,  after  re- 
connoitering  the  island,  quitted  the  colony  on  the  fourth  of 
January  1493,  and  arrived  in  Spain  the  following  March.  Pro- 
ceeding instantly  to  Barcelona,  where  the  court  resided,  he  was 
welcomed  with  extraordinary  demonstrations  of  joy :  the  no- 
bility and  people  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  accompanied  hioi 
in  crowds  to  his  sovereign,  to  whom  he  presented  so.iTie  of  the 
Islanders  who  had  voluntarily  attended  him  to  Europe.  Birds, 
cotton,  and  various  curiosities  were  exhibited  as  the  fruit  of  his 
discoveries  ;  but  above  all,  as  most  attractive  to  avaricious  eyes, 
pieces  of  gold,  which  Immediately  convinced  every  one  that  he 
had  found  Inexhaustible  riches,  and  was  at  once  the  most  fortu- 
nate and  the  most  honourable  of  mankind.  It  was  not  enough 
to  load  him  with  caresses  and  praises,  their  enthusiasm  allowed 
bira  to  sit  as  a  grandee  of  Spain  at  the  public  audience  of  the 
sovereigns. 

The  stay  of  Columbus  at  Barcelona  was  not  prolonged  a  sin- 
gle hour  for  the  purpose  of  indulging  himself  In  inglorious  ease. 
When  the  purpose  of  his  visit  was  accomplished  he  felt  anxious 
to  depart ;  which,  however,  he  was  desirous  not  to  do,  till  the 
natives  who  had  accompanied  him  to  Europe,  among  whom  was 

S 


10  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

the  father  of  the  cazlque  beforementione<l,  were  baptized  into 
the  Catholic  faith,  and  publicly  received  into  the  Communion 
of  that  church.  This  was  accordingly  done  in  the  presence  and 
with  the  co-operation  of  the  royal  family.  The  Catholics  car- 
ried their  zeal  still  further,  and  chose  a  number  of  ecclesiastics 
out  of  the  religious  orders,  who  were  deputed  to  go  abroad 
under  a  superior,  to  whom  the  pope  entrusted  extraordinary 
powers,  with  a  view  of  proselyting  the  inhabitants  of  the  new 
world  to  their  religion.* 

At  the  expiration  of  about  six  months,  being  furnished  with  a 
fleet  of. seventeen  sail,  under  the  papal  sanction.  Containing 
fifteen  hundred  persons,  most  of  them- gentlemen,  and  some  of 
distinguished  rank,  with  soldiers,  artificers  and  missionaries,  with 
abundant  provisions,  instruments  for  working  the  mines,  the 
seeds  of  all  the  plants  considered  likely  to  thrive  in  the  climate, 
and  with  the  domestic  animals  of  Europe,  which  were  unknown 
in  the  newly  discovered  region,  Columbus  set  sail  in  the  au- 
tumn from  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  and  arrived  at  St.  Domingo  on  the 
twenty-second  of  November.  But  how  extrenje  his  disappoint- 
ment to  witness  devastation  instead  of  prosperity,  and  silence 
instead  of  notes  of  welcome  and  congratulaiion  ! 

During  the  interval  of  his  absence,  and  indeed  veiy  soon  after 
his  depai^ure,  the  gariison  revolted  from  the  authority  of  their 
commander,  and  in  defiance  of  all  wholesome  restraint  as  well 
as  of  every  prudential  consideration,  indulged  in  riot  and  licen- 
tiousness, seizing  the  provisions  and  the  gold  of  the  natives.  The 
evil  becoming  past  further  endurance,  the  cazique  of  Cibao  de- 
stroyed the  fort  and  colony ;  so  that  in  the  expressive  words  of 
the  Abbe  Haynal,  *^' Columbus  found  nothing  but  ruins  and  car- 
cases upon  the  spot  where  he  had  left  fortifications  and  Span- 
iartis."  Instead  of  uselessly  wasting  his  time  in  retaliations,  he 
induced  his  companions  to  begin  the  erection  of  a  city  in  a  spa- 
cious plain,  conveniently  situated  with  respect  to  a  bay,  and  at 
length  dignified  with  the  name  of  Isabella,  in  honour  of  the 
queen  his  patroness.     A  fort  was  also  built  on  the  mountains  of 

*  Charlevoix  Hist,  de  I'Isle  Espagnole. 


ENTIRE  SUBJUGATION  OF  THE  ISLAND.  11 

Cibao,  where  they  collected  gold  in  considerable  quantities 
from  the  torrents,  and  where  they  determined  to  open  mines. 

Intent  on  the  grf-at  purpose  of  making  further  discoveries, 
Columbus  appointed  his  brother  Diego  to  govern  during  his 
absence  and  debarked  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  April ;  but  after 
a  disastrous  navigation  of  five  months,  returned  to  witness  new 
calamities.  The  soldiery  had  been  placed  under  the  command 
of  Don  Pedro  Margarita,  and  were  commissioned  to  undertake 
the  establishment  of  the  Spanish  authority  in  different  parts  of 
the  island.  Tiiey  committed  similar  excesses  to  those  who  had 
previously  produced  the  destruction  of  the  first  colony  ;  and 
Columbus  was  necessitated  to  lake  up  arms  to  repel  those  attacks 
which  had  before  proved  successful.  The  battle  was  fought  in 
the  plain  of  Vegal  Real,  and  notwithstanding  the  extreme  dis- 
parity of  numbers,  there  being  a  hundred  thousand  Indians,  and 
only  two  hundred  foot,  twenty  horse  and  twenty  dogs  to  com- 
pose the  Spanish  armament,  it  will  n6t  appear  surprising  that 
European  discipline  should  obtain  an  easy  conquest  over  the 
military  incompetence  of  the  Haytians.*  The  prisoners  were 
condemned  to  the  mines,  excepting  three  hundred,  who  were 
sent  into  Spain  as  slaves;  but  to  the  immortal  honour  of  the 
Q^ueen  of  Castile  be  it  recorded,  she  restored  them  to  their 
country,  accompanied  with  orders  to  give  them  their  liberty, 
and  at  the  same  time  to' pay  particular  attention  to  conciliate 
the  islanders  to  the  Christian  religion,  and  to  bring  them  by  per- 
suasion, not  by  compulsion,  to  submit  to  the  crown  of  Castile. f 

These  orders,  however,  arrived  too  late.  The  entire  subjec- 
tion of  the  island  was  the  natural  consequence  of  this  victory, 
which  was  achieved  in  March,   1495.     A  lax  was  imposed  on 

*  "  Ces  pauvres  insulaires,  accoutumes  la  pliipart  a  se  battre  en  se  poussanl  4 
force  de  bias,  ou  tout  au  plus  a  coups  de  Macanas  furent  etrangcment  surpris  de 
v(  ir  les  Kspagnols  a  battre  des  lignes  entieres  aven  leurs  armes  a  feu,  dont  aucun 
coup  ne  portoit  a  laux  sur  des  corps  tout  nuds  et  qu'on  approchoit  aussi  pres  qu'on 
vouloit,  enfiler  trois  ou  quaire  hommes  a  la  fois  avec  leurs  longues  epees,  les 
fouler  aux  pieds  des  chevaux  and  lacher  sur  eux  de  gros  matins  qui  ieur  sautarit 
a  la  gorge,  les  etraugloient  d'abord  et  les  mettotent  en  pieces." — Charlevoix. 

t  Charlevoix. 


1:^  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

all  the  natives  above  the  age  of  fourteen,  to  be  paid  in  gold 
every  taree  months  by  those  who  lived  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
mines,  by  others  in  cotton  ;  the  consequence  of  which  was  an 
attempt  on  their  part  to  reduce  the  Spaniards  to  starvation,  by 
tearing  up  the  roots  of  vegetables,  and  retiring  from  the  labours 
of  the  field  to  the  inaccessible  parts  of  the  mountains.  By  this 
means,  however,  they  became  themselves  the  victims  of  their 
own  inconsideration  and  inexperience,  and  upwards  of  a  third  of 
their  number  perished.  Previously  to  this  terrible  disaster  they 
were  estimated  at  a  million.  It  was  not,  however,  famine 
merely  that  occasioned  their  destruction  ;  the  ferocious  colonists 
pursued  them  to  their  fastnesses,  and  even  trained  up  dogs  to 
hunt  and  devour  them  It  has  even  been  said,  that  some  of 
the  Caslilians  had  made  avow  to  massacre  twelve  Indians  every 
day  in  honour  of  the  twelve  apostles  !  !  * 

Should  an  unlucky  moralist  here  interpose  the  question, 
What  right  had  the  Spanish  adventurers  to  the  soil  of  St.  Do- 
mingo, and  the  service  of  its  inhabitants  .^  Should  he  further 
inquire  by  what  authority  they  or  the  European  masters  under 
whom  they  acted,  plundered  their  possessions,  shed  their  blood, 
and  taxed  their  tamiii<  s  ?  The  reply  must  be  given  in  that 
single  word  which  comprehends  the  entire  policy  of  half  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  and  which  is  so  legibly  written  in  the  an- 
nals of  every  country — Power.  The  well-known  feelings  of 
Columbus  himself,  upon  this  subject,  who  only  aimed  to  gra- 
tify the  avaricious  spirit  of  his  court,  exempt  him  in  some 
measure,  from  that  unmingled  sentiment  of  abhorrence,  which 
must  fill  every  enlightened  individual  at  the  recital  of  such  de- 
testable enormities. 

"  Man  is  to  man  the  worGt  an<3  surest  itl." 

Had  it  not  been  for  the  actual  proceedings  of  these  servants  of 
Spain,  we  should  have  said,  that  they  had  in  trust  the  arts  of 
civilization,  and  the  elements  of  superiur  character  to  convey 
to  these  barbarous  islanders  ;  and  to  communicate  them  should 

"    *"  Abbe  Raynal's  Hist,  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  Book  0. 


^'EW    DIFFICULTIES    AWAIT    COLUMBUS.  13 

have  been  the  legitimate  object  of  their  mission — should  have 
been  the  delight  of  their  existence.  If  discovery  be  not  made 
subservient  to  the  promotion  of  human  happiness,  it  may  well 
be  deprecated  as  an  evil;  for  if  misery  follow  in  the  train,  who 
could  wish  for  the  extension  of  our  geographical  knowledge,  at 
the  expence  of  the  comfort  and  the  peace  of  millions  of  our 
fellow-creatures  ?  And  who  can  help  burning  with  indignation 
to  see  the  demon  of  Avarice  binding  St.  Domingo  in  chains,  in 
order  to  rob  her  of  her  gold  ? 

In  the  mean  time, difficulties  of  a  new  kind  awaited  Columbus. 
His  adversaries  in  Spain  had  intrigued  to  procure  Aguado,  a 
groom  of  the  bed-chamber,  to  be  sent  out  as  commissioner,  and 
our  great  discoverer  felt  himself  compelled  lo  return  to  Europe 
to  meet  and  obviate  the  accusations  which  were  contrived 
against  him.  His  brother  Bartholomew  was  left  lieutenant- 
governor  upon  the  island,  and  soon  began  the  building  of  the 
town  of  St.  Domingo.  Francis  Roldan,  a  man  of  rank,  was  chief 
justice.     This  was  in  1496. 

The  precise  causes  of  the  dissentions  whtch  instantly  arose 
among  the  colonists,  it  may  perhaps  be  somewhat  difficult  to 
explain.  A  pretence  was  unquestionably  afforded  by  the  re- 
moval of  the  settlers  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  island,  that  is, 
from  Isabella  to  St.  Domingo  ;  which  Columbus  had  considered 
a  more  eligible  situation,  and  whither  his  brother  after  his  de- 
parture transferred  them.  Instead  of  maintaining  order,  Roldan 
encouraged  insubordination  ;  and  thinking  that  Columbus  was 
not  likely  to  return,  he  formed  the  design  of  seizing  the  go- 
vernment. For  this  purpose,  he  insinuated  himself  into  the 
confidence  and  affection  of  the  people,  misrepresenting  the 
conduct  of  others.  Having  been  commissioned  to  head  a  band 
of  soldiers  to  enforce  the  payment  of  tribute  from  one  of  the 
refractory  caziques,  he  availed  himself  of  the  favourable  oppor- 
tunity of  disseminating  rebellious  feelings,  and  upon  his  return, 
openly  seized  the  keys  of  the  royal  magazine,  distributing  the 
arms  and  provisions  to  his  party.  Don  Diego  was  obliged  to 
shut  himself  up  in  the  castle,  and  procure  defenders  from  Con- 
ception.    Bartholomew  was  of  course  on   his  side  filled  with 


14  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

apprehensions  at  the  progress  of  the  revolt,  especially  when  he 
found  that  several  persons  of  consideration  were  engaged  in  it. 
He  obtained  an  interview  with  Roldan,  but  the  latter  was  resolv- 
ed to  carry  things  to  the  utmost  extremity.  The  troops  began 
to  desert  from  the  garrison,  and  Bartholomew  was  beginning  to 
despair,  when  he  received  information  of  the  arrival  of  two 
ships  at  St.  Domingo  laden  with  provision  Instantly  he  hasten- 
ed towards  the  capital,  followed  by  Holdan,  who  halted  at 
the  distance  of  five  leagues.  Here  the  rebel  chief  received 
new  proposals  for  peace  through  the  commander  of  the  Vessels, 
who  entreated  him  to  desist,  but  in  vain.  Withdrawing  into 
the  province  of  Xarangua,  he  told  the  cazique  that  he  came  to 
release  him  from  the  tribute  which  had  been  imposed  by  the 
king,  and  that  for  his  part  he  did  not  desire  the  possessions,  but 
the  hearts  of  his  allies.  He  held  the  same  language  to  other 
caziques,  while  in  fact  he  made  them  pay  dearly  for  his  friend- 
ship. 

News  very  soon  reached  St.  Domingo  that  a  chief  named 
Guarionex,  had  fled  with  a  considerable  number  of  his  subjects 
to  the  protection  of  another  chief  named  Mayobanex,  who  ruled 
over  a  warlike  district  in  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Cabron.  Dis- 
appointed of  his  expectations  from  these  tributaries  in  conse- 
quence of  this  movement,  the  governor  immediately  went  in 
pursuit.  He  met  an  army  of  the  natives  in  the  plains,  aiid  in- 
stantly dispersed  them  into  the  mountains,  whither  however  he 
did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  follow.  Some  days  aftei  wards,  the 
Indians  perceiving  that  the  Spaniards  were  off  their  guard,  rush- 
ed upon  them  and  slew  many,  but  the  troops  recruiting,  abun- 
dantly retaliated  upon  their  enemies,  whom  they  chased  unto 
their  defiles.  Mayobanex  was  at  no  great  distance  fiom  this 
field  of  action,  and  Bartholomew  having  discovered  the  place 
of  his  retreat,  marched  upon  it  with  his  entire  force. 

Before  the  commencement  of  actual  hostilities,  he  sent  to 
offer  terms  to  the  cazique  upon  condition  of  his  delivering  up 
Guarionex.  The  brave  Indian  replied,  that  "  Guarionex  was  a 
man  of  honour,  who  had  never  done  an  injury  to  any  person ; 
while  the  Spaniards  were  thieves  and  murderers,  who  adopted 


NOBLE-SPIRirEDNESS    OF    MAYOBANEX.  15 

every  unworthy  method  of  despoiling  others  of  their  posses- 
sions— that  he  would  never  suffer  himself  to  abandon  an  unfor- 
tunate prince,  who  was  besides  his  benefactor  and  his  friend, 
and  had  cast  himself  under  his  protection."  He  spoke  in  a 
similar  manner  to  his  courtiers,  who  seeing  the  ravages  made 
all  over  their  country  by  the  invaders,  and  affected  by  the  com- 
plaints of  the  people  that  the  war  would  be  their  ruin,  repre- 
sented that  he  would  destroy  himself  and  not  save  his  friend. 
"Let  what  will  happen,"  said  he,  "I  am  resolved  rather  to 
perish  than  deliver  him  up  to  his  enemies."  To  the  prince 
himself  he  repeated  the  same  resolution,  and  they  sealed  their 
mutual  attachment  with  vows  and  tears. 

•  After  thisj.Mayobanex  took  care  to  occupy  all  the  defiles 
of  the  mountains,  and  to  issue  orders  to  his  army  to  fall  upon 
their  enemies  whenever  they  could  do  it  with  any  probable 
advantage.  The  governor  considered  it  of  great  importance  in 
the  mean  time  rather  to  gain  than  compel  the  islanders,  and 
with  this  view  he  sent  three  prisoners  whom  he  had  just  taken, 
and  drew  near  himself  with  ten  foot  soldiers  and  only  four  horse. 
All  thereply  of  the  indignant  cazique,  consisted  in  killing  the  pri- 
soners and  preparing  for  battle.  It  was  hence  obvious  that  no 
further  conciliatory  measures  would  avail,  and  force  must  decide 
the  quarrel.  The  natives  were  soon  routed,  and  two  days  after- 
wards the  governor  having  learnt  by  two  prisoners  the  hiding 
place  of  Mayobanex,  he  made  use  of  the  following  stratagem. 
Having  chosen  twelve  of  his  men  whom  he  disguised  as  natives, 
he  sent  them  with  the  two  already  mentioned  as  guides,  and 
concealed  their  swords  in  palm-leaves.  In  this  manner  they 
proceeded  to  the  cazique's  retreat,  where  they  found  him  sur- 
rounded with  his  wife,  his  children,  and  many  of  his  relations. 
He  was  instantly  secured  without  resistance,  and  conveyed  to 
the  general,  who  carried  him  as  his  prisoner  on  his  way  to  Con- 
ception. One  of  the  cazique's  daughters  was  in  the  train  j  she 
was  in  the  highest  estimation  among  her  father's  subjects,  the 
Ciguayans,  and  had  married  one  of  the  .principal  lords  of  the 
country.  Her  husband  upon  hearing  of  her  captivity,  collected 
his  dependants  together,  and  hastened  after  the  Spaniards  whom 


16  HISTORY    OF    ST,    DOMINGO. 

he  overtook  in  a  few  days.  Instantly  he  cast  himself  at  the 
feet  of  the  governor,  entreating  with  tears  the  restoration  of  his 
wife  ;  which  was  granted  without  exacting  any  ransom.  This 
act  of  clemency,  however,  was  greatly  subservient  to  the  interests 
of  .the  ambitious  foreigners,  by  impressing  upon  the  mind  of  this 
man  an  eternal  sense  of  gratitude.  In  a  few  days  he  came  with 
four  or  five  hundred  of  his  subjects  vpith  the  sticks  they  were 
accustomed  to  use  in  turning  the  soil,  and  requested  to  mark 
out  a  space  for  them  to  cultivate  and  possess.  His  offer  was 
accepted,  and  in  a  few  days'the  ground  was  cleared. 

Conceiving  hopes  from  the  conduct  of  the  Spaniards  on  this 
occasion,  the  subjects  of  Mayobanex  indulged  the  expectation 
of  procuring  his  release,  and  they  spared  neither  tears,  prayers, 
nor  presents  to  procure  it ;  but  it  was  determined  to  make  an 
example  of  this  chief  who  exercised  an  entire  influence  over 
many  others ;  his  family  was  restored,  but  himself  detained  in 
bondage.  This  refusal  filled  the  poor  islanders  with  the  utmost 
resentment  against  Guarionex  whom  they  considered  as  the 
occasion  of  this  calamity  :  but  in  vain  did  they  deliver  him  up 
to  the  Spaniards.  Mayobanex  \;as  taken  to  the  capital,  where 
after  a  formal  trial  he  was  convicted  of  rebellion  and  publicly 
executed.  Let  not  the  year  of  this  transaction  be  forgotten  : 
it  was  in  149S. 

At  this  juncture  Columbus  arrived  from  Spain ;  he  was  receiv- 
ed with  every  demonstration  of  joy  in  the  capital,  but  his  own 
gratification  was  spoiled  by  the  melancholy  state  of  affairs.  He 
advised  and  adopted  every  conciliatory  measure  to  gain  the 
malcontents,  and  the  commandant  of  Conception  was  dispatch- 
ed to  Roldan  to  obtain  terms  of  accommodation.  The  rebel 
was  still  inexorable,  Columbus  afterwards  sent  him  a  kind  letter 
by  a  messenger  whom  he  had  wished  to  see^  which  seemed  to 
make  some  impression  upon  his  mind  and  induced  him  to  ex- 
press a  wish  to  see  his  admiral ;  to  this  his  followers  strongly 
objected,  so  that  he  was  necessitated  to  content  himself  with 
sending  a  letter,  in  which  he  threw  all  the  blame  of  the  revolt 
upon  the  governor,  and  wished  for  a  safe  conduct  for  himself 
and  associates  to  the  capital.  This  occasioned  great  embar- 
rassment. 


DISTRIBUTION   OF    THE    LANDS.  17 

On  the  ninth  of  November,  he  adopted  the  measure  of  pub- 
lishing a  manifesto,  in  which  it  was  declared  that  all  persons 
who  returned  to  their  duty  within  a  limited  time  should  receive  a 
full  pardon  for  past  revolt,  and  that  all  who  desired  it  should  be 
conveyed  into  Spain.  In  addition  to  this,  a  safe  conduct  was 
transmitted  to  Roldan,  who  at  leno;th  repaired  to  the  capital ; 
not  however  for  the  purpose  of  re-establishing  union,  but  of 
secretly  exciting  dissatisfaction  and  increasing  his  own  party. 
As  soon  as  he  returned,  he  sent  an  insolent  letter  and  marched 
upon  Conception.  The  place  being  well  defended,  he  attempt- 
ed to  subdue  it  by  a  prolonged  siege  ;  but  an  officer  named 
Carrajal  coming  up,  dexterously  entered  into  negociatlons  with 
Roldan,  who  gave  his  signature  to  terms  in  a  few  days,  of  which 
the  principal  one  was,  that  those  who  wished  to  return  into 
Spain  should  be  allowed  to  do  so  and  be  provided  with  the 
means.  The  vessels  which  were  provided  for  this  purpose  hav- 
ing been  wrecked,  in  a  violent  tempest,  on  their  way  to  the 
port  where  they  were  to  have  received  their  passengers,  Roldan 
availed  himself  of  the  circumstance  to  refuse  adherence  to  his 
agreement,  but  upon  fresh  ships  being  provided,  he  was  at 
length,  with  difficulty,  brought  anew  to  his  engagement.  After 
every  preparation  was  made,  Roldan  presented  a  request  on 
behalf  of  a  hundred  and  two  of  his  companions  who  wished  to 
remain  in  the  island,  and  they  were  ultimately  allowed  to  dis- 
perse themselves  in  distinct  settlements  in  the  Vega  Real,  at 
Bonao,  and  beyond  St.  Vago.  The  neighbouring  caziques 
were  obliged  to  send  their  subjects  to  cultivate  these  lands,  so 
that  instead  of  tribute,  the  Indians  were  reduced  to  labour  for 
these  new  masters,  who  were  the  refractory  portion  of  their 
European  invaders.  Hence  originated  the  names  of  repariimen- 
ios,  or  departments,  distributions,  commands,  and  concessions. 
In  the  mean  time,  Roldan  continued  to  behave  towards  Colum- 
bus rather  like  a  conqueror  than  a  pardoned  rebel  j  but  the 
latter  felt  it  necessary  to  dissemble  his  resentment,  hoping  that 
the  affair  would  be  ultimately  investigated  and  adjusted  in  Spain,* 


•  Charlevoix,  Hist,  de  I'lsle  Espagnole,  Tom.  I, 
4 


18  HISTORY    OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

■  The  conduct  of  Columbus  had  been  so  shamefully  misrepre- 
sented, that  Francis  de  Bovadilio,  a  knight  of  Calatravia,  was 
sent  over  in  1500,  to  supersede  him,  with  orders  to  disniiss  him 
to  Spain  in  irons.  He  found  considerable  difficulty  at  first  in 
establishing  his  authority,  as  those  already  in  possession  were 
disposed  to  retain  it :  but  having  obtained  it  by  a  sort  of  inva- 
sion, which  the  resistance  of  the  present  occupants  rendered 
necessary,  rather  than  by  a  dignified  entrance  conceded  to  him 
by  general  affection,  he  acted  with  great  indiscretion.  Instead 
of  suppressing,  he  cherished  Roldan  and  the  other  malcontents, 
bestowing  upon  them  marks  of  high  distinction  ;  while  Colum- 
bus, his  brother,  and  their  friends  were  treated  with  every  indig- 
nity, till  the  discovei-er  and  rightful  lord  of  the  island  was  in  fact 
dismiissed  to  Europe  in  a  disgraceful  manner. 

It  was  the  incessant  aim  of  the  new  governor  to  aggravate 
the  detestation  of  every  one  against  the  whole  family  of  Co- 
lumbus, especially  the  natives,  and  his  misconduct  drew  around 
him  and  placed  in  his  confidence  the  refuse  of  society.  His 
unworthy  care  was  more  completely  to  enslave  the  inhabitants; 
for  which  purpose  he  contracted  with  the  different  caziques  lo 
furnish  every  Spaniard  with  a  certain  number  of  his  subjects 
whom  he  was  to  make  use  of  as  his  beasts  of  burden ;  and  in 
order  to  prevent  any  possible  escape  from  the  infamous  servi- 
tude, he  numbered  the  igative  population  ;  and  reducing  them 
into  different  classes,  distributed  them  among  his  adherents,  by 
whose  afTection  he  was  well  aware  that  he  held  the  precarious 
tenure  of  his  new  authority. 

This  proceeding  threatened  their  total  extinction,  and  Bova- 
dillo  was  in  his  turn  superseded  by  another  knight  of  the  name 
of  Nicholas  de  Ovando,  who  carried  with  him  the  largest  arma- 
ment that  had  ever  yet  been  witnessed,  consisting  of  thirty-two 
ships  with  two  thousand  five  hundred  settlers  ;  and  upon  his 
arrival,  the  former  governor  with  Roldan  and  his  accomplices 
was  oi'dered  back. 

Ovando  is  represented  as  a  man  of  merit  and  capable  of  in- 
spiring others  with  respect ;  modest,  and  disinterested  :  but  his 
employment  was  infectious,  so  much  so  as  to  transform    the 


BOVADILLO    AND    OVANDO.  19 

very  greatest  of  men  into  tyrants.  None  of  the  governors  of  this 
unhappy  island  appear  to  have  been  sufficiently  principled  to 
resist  the  combined  influence  of  the  love  of  rule  and  the  love 
of  money.* 

In  the  mean  time  Columbus  remained  in  a  state  of  irksome 
inactivity,  soliciting  attention  in  vain,  til!  he  commenced  a  fourth 
voyage  to  attempt  discoveries  in  the  East,  May,  1502.  Having 
steered  to  St.  Domingo  to  obtain  of  Ovando  the  exchange  of  a 
vessel,  he  requested  permission  to  enter  the  harbour,  which  was 
denied.  Twenty-one  ships  were  at  the  moment  departing  for 
Spain,  nearly  the  whole  of  which  were  lost  in  a  tempest,  then 
evidently  gathering,  and  of  which  Columbus  in  vain  forewarned 
them  :  Bovadillo,  Roldan,  and  most  of  the  persecutors  of  Co- 
lumbus and  the  Indians,  with  the  whole  of  their  wealth,  amount- 
ing in  value  to  upwards  of  fifty  thousand  pounds  sterling,  perish- 
ed in  the  general  wreck ;  the  effects  of  this  tremendous  storm 
were  not  limited  to  the  ocean  :  the  city  of  St.  Domingo  was 
almost  wholly  destroyed,  but  in  a  short  time  afterwards  was 
rebuilt  with  considerable  improvements. 

Notwithstanding  the  humanity  of  our  great  discoverer,  he  had 
very  much  increased  the  miseries  of  the  island  by  fixing  Ameri- 
cans upon  the  lands  distributed  to  his  soldiers,  a  plan  which  was 
extended  by  Bovadillo,  but  destroyed  by  Ovando.  The  latter 
relieved  the  Indians  from  a  toil  which  had  been  so  utterly  in- 
compatible with  their  habits  and  tempers,  but  it  was  soon  found 
that  the  claim  of  expedience  and  the  plea  of  necessity  superseded 

*  "  Ovando  etoit  un  homme  de  merite,  fort  sense,  d'un  abord  gracieux  et  qui 
inspiroi.t  eu  meme-tems  un  grand  respect  pour  sa  personne  :  mudeste,  jusqu  a  ne 
pouvoirsouffrir  les  marques  de  distinction,  ni  les  litres,  quilui  eiorient  dus,  grand 
amateur  de  la  justice,  et  fort  desinteresst-.  Le  Nouveau  Monde  eut  ete  heu- 
reux  d'etre  gouverne  par  un  homme  de  ce  caractere,  s'il  I'eut  soutenu  tout  entier 
jusqu  au  bout  Mais  il  sembloit  que  I'emploi,  dont  on  le  revetit,  fut  contagieux, 
es  transformat  d'abord  les  bommes  les  plus  doux  et  les  plus  modr6es  en  tyrans 
suscites  pour  la  destruction  des  malheureux  Indiens:  a  I'egard  meme  des  Espag- 
nols,  il  ne  parut  pas  se  comforter  toujours  avec  ce  desinteressment  et  cette 
cquite,  qu'on  lui  avoitconnus,  ni  etre  asses  en  garde  contra  les  rapports  de  gens 
mal  intcntionnes  :  ce  qui  le  fit  quelquefois  donner  dans  de  grands  travers." 
Charlevoix,  Hist,  de  I'lsle  Espagnole,  Tom.  I. 


20  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOIVflNGO. 

that  of  justice.  The  natives  wandered  up  and  down  through 
the  island  without  any  regular  employment,  and  relapsed  into  a 
state  of  indolence  which  was  productive  of  famine.  Their  op- 
pressors soon  a^ain  demanded  their  services,  and  urged  upon 
the  court  the  consideration  that  they  would  always  be  disposed 
to  revolt,  unless  prevented  by  puflGcient  dispersion-  After  seve- 
ral discussions,  it  was  resolved  to  divide  the  island  into  a  greater 
number  of  districts,  which  the  Spaniards  obtained  in  proportioa 
to  their  rank  or  interest :  the  Indians  attached  to  them  were 
slaves,  whom  the  law  was  in  vain  bound  to  protect. 

In  1504,  Columbus  again  visited  St.  Domingo,  after  having 
been  stopped  in  the  career  of  discovery  by  shipwreck  and  de- 
tention in  the  island  of  Jamaica  twelve  months.  Though  cau- 
tious of  receiving  him,  Ovando  at  length  procured  his  escape 
and  admission  into  the  island  with  every  public  honour.  Here 
he  remained  but  a  single  month,  and  returned  with  difficulty  and 
in  a  tempest  into  Spain,  where,  instead  of  being  welcomed  in  a 
manner  suited  to  the  greatness  of  his  character,  and  the  magni- 
tude of  his  discoveries,  he  experienced  coldness  and  injustice  : 
he  died  in  May,  1506,  at  Valladolid,  only  fifty-nine  years  af  age. 
"  Such  was  the  end  of  this  uncommon  man,  who,  to  the  asto- 
nishment of  Europe,  added  to  a  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  or  ra- 
ther, half  a  world  to  this  globe  which  had  been  so-long  desolate 
and  so  little  known.  It  might  reasonably  have  been  expected, 
that  public  gratitude  would  have  given  the  name  of  this  intrepid 
seaman  to  the  new  hemisphere,  the  first  discovery  of  which  was 
owing  to  his  enterprising  genius.  This  was  the  least  homage  of 
respect  that  could  be  paid  to  his  memory;  but  either  through 
envy,  inattention,  or  the  caprice  of  fortune  even  in  the  distribu- 
tion of  fame,  this  honour  was  reserved  for  Amerieus  Vespucius, 
a  Florentine;  who  did  nothing  more  than  follow  the^ footsteps 
of  a  man  whose  name  ought  to  stand  foremost  in  the  list  of  great 
characters."* 

Ovando  is  represented  by  all  the  historians  as  exercising  a 
considerable  degree  of  wisdom  and  justice  in  his  administration, 

•  Abb6  Raynal. 


REVOLT   IN   HIGUET.  21 

SO  far  as  regarded  his  countrymen,  while  he  swayed  a  rigorous 
sceptre  over  the  poor  natives.  His  constant  aim  was  to  pro- 
mote the  prosperity  of  the  settlement,  and  with  a  discretion 
that  does  him  credit,  he  endeavoured  to  excite  the  attention  of 
the  Spaniards  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  the  forming  of 
plantations  of  sugar  cane,  which  he  had  obtained  from  the 
Canary  isles,  and  the  establishment  of  sugar  works. 

Various  symptoms  of  dissatisfaction,  with  Spanish  oppression, 
from  time  to  time  presented  themselves  in  different  provinces. 
In  the  year  1502,  exasperation  had  led  to  the  assassination  of  a 
few  Spaniards  in  Higuey,  which  led  to  a  more  extended  mani- 
festation of  a  spirit  of  revolt.  The  governor  considered  it  im- 
portant to  adopt  instant  measures  to  check  this  growing  evil, 
and  accordingly  dispatched  an  officer  with  four  hundred  men  to 
the  spot.  He  met  however,  with  much  greater  resistance  than  he 
had  anticipated,  and  some  detachments  of  his  force  were  cut 
off  J  upon  this,  Esquibel,  the  commanding  officer,  acting  upon 
instructions  which  he  had  received  from  Ovando,  offered  the 
Indians  conditions  of  peace,  but  they  were  rejected  with  disdain, 
and  continued  for  a  time  to  wage  successful  war  with  their  in- 
vaders. But  the  tide  at  length  turned,  and  they  were  vigorously 
pursued  into  the  mountains,  the  usual  place  of  their  retreat 
after  disastrous  engagements.  Here  they  were  slain  in  such 
numbers  that  their  well-peopled  province  appeared  afterwards 
like  a  desert :  the  cheftain  who  had  formerly  refused,  was  now 
reduced  to  the  necessity  of  soliciting  peace  ;  and  Esquibel 
erected  and  garrisoned  a  fortress  upon  his  territory. 

A  still  more  formidable  insurrection  was  in  J  503,  beginning 
to  display  itself  in  the  province  of  Xaragua.  Ever  since  the 
affair  of  Roldan,  a  considerable  number  of  his  accomplices  had 
remained  in  this  part  of  the  country,  who  were  perpetually  sow- 
ing the  seeds  of  impiety  and  discontent.  Anacoana,  the  prin- 
cess who  governed  this  district,  had  been  at  first  extremely  well 
inclined  towards  the  Spaniards,  but  their  misconduct  converted 
her  affection  into  hatred,  at  least  so  they  persuaded  themselves, 
conscious  that  there  was  too  much  cause  for  the  existence  of 
such  an  altered  state  of  feeling.     Information  was  accordingly 


ZZ  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

communicated  to  the  capital,  that  the  queen  of  Xaragua  was 
meditating  some  rebellious  project ;  and  it  was  suggested  that 
no  time  ought  to  be  lost  in  taking  measures  to  prevent  it. 

Ovando  was  too  well  aware  of  the  character  of  his  informers 
to  place  implicit  reliance  upon  their  representations,  and  too 
liitle  confident  in  them  to  feel  much  disposed  to  adopt  their 
quarrel ;  still  he  deemed  it  a  necessary  precaution  to  undertake 
a  journey  into  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  after  a  public  announce- 
ment of  his  intention  to  visit  the  province  of  Xara2;ua  for  the 
purpose  of  receiving  the  tribute  which  was  due  to  the  crown  of 
Castile,  and  of  seeing  a  princess  who  had  always  professed  the 
greatest  friendship  for  the  Spanish  nation,  he  set  out  at  the  hea,d 
of  three  hundred  foot  and  seventy  horse,  upon  the  expedition. 
Anacoana  publicly  testified  the  utmost  joy  at  the  honour  of  tl)is 
visit,  whether  from  motives  of  policy  or  aflection  it  may  be 
difficult  to  determine.  She  went  forth  to  meet  Ovando,  atten- 
ded by  the  entire  body  of  her  nobility  and  an  incalculable  mul- 
titude of  people,  dancing  and  singing  as  they  proceeded.  Af- 
ter the  first  compliments,  the  governor  was  conducted  to  the 
royal  palace  amidst  the  most  rapturous  and  universal  acclama- 
tion's, and  a  feast  was  prepared  which  was  kept  for  several  suc- 
cessive days  in  the  most  magnificent  manner. 

The  historian  Herrera,  states,  that  Ovando  was  soon  con- 
vinced of  the  existence  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  Spaniards, 
but  by  v.hat  evidence  it  does  not  appear  :  Oviedo  represents  a 
confession  as  having  been  extorted  from  three  hundred  caziques, 
who  were  the  queen's  vassals,  by  torture,  a  proceeding  which 
has  been  strongly  condemned  by  most  of  the  other  Spanish 
historians.'  The  governor  accordingly  adopted  the  following 
mode  of  sacrificing  the  accused  to  the  security  of  the  colony. 
Having  invited  the  queen  to  a  feast,  which  he  said  should  be 
celebrated  after  the  manner  of  his  country,  with  all  the  pomp 
of  his  assembled  nobility,  the  whole  Indian  court,  as  h<-r  atten- 
dants, were  thus  collected  on  one  spot :  the  Spaniards  at  length 
appeared  in  the  order  of  battle,  the  infantry  marching  bffore 
and  occupying  all  the  avenues  to  the  place  as  they  advanced  : 
the  cavalry  followed,  with  the  governor  at  their  head,  and 


afASSACRE    OF    THE    XARANGUANS.  2S 

moved  on  to  the  queen's  residence,  who  was  not  a  little  alarm- 
ed to  see  them  approaching  sword  in  hand.  In  obedience  to  a 
preconcerted  sign,  the  multitude  were  instantly  put  to  the  sword, 
while  the  unfortunate  queen  with  her  whole  court  were  secured  : 
the  caziques. were  fixed  to  the  stakes  used  in  the  temporary 
construction  for  the  feast,  and  perished  in  the  flames  in  which 
the  building  was  consumed,  while  the  queen  was  reserved  for  a 
more  disgraceful  end,  being  conducted  to  the  capital,  and  there 
tried,  condemned,  and  publicly  executed  on  a  gallows.  Of  the 
people  who  were  thus  treacherously  assassinated,  the  numbers 
of  all  ranks  and  conditions  cannot  be  reckoned  ; — high  and  low, 
rich  and  poor,  men  and  women,  the  innocent  and  guilty  were 
alike  indiscriminately  massacred.  The  few  who  escaped  fled 
of  course  in  every  direction,  and  souje  of  them  settled  in  far 
distant  places. 

After  the  conclusion  of  this  military  visit,  Ovando  gave  his 
attention  to  the  establishment  of  towns  and  villages,  selecting 
the  most  advantageous  situations  for  their  erection,  so  that  in 
1504,  the  Spaniards  possessed  fifteen  cities  or  towns  filled  with 
their  own  population,  besides  two  fortresses  in  Higuey,  Isabella, 
and  other  places,  formed  at  first  for  the  mines  of  Cibao  and 
Christopher,  but  which  had  now  been  some  time  abandoned.* 

In  the  year  1506,.  the  province  of  Higuey  where  it  was  sup- 
posed tranquillity  had  been  fully  restored,  was  again  in  a  state  of 
open  revolt.  The  bad  faith  of  the  Spaniards  having  led  them 
to  violate  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  which  had  been  conclu- 
ded with  Esquibel,  the  Indians  after  preferring  many  useless 
complaints,  attacked  and  burned  the  fortress  and  massacred  the 
garrison.  A  resolution  was  instantly  taken  to  revenge  this  pro- 
ceeding in  the  most  signal  manner,  and  Esquibel  was  again  dis- 
patched to  chastise  the  insurgent  district.  Having  subsidized  a 
number  of  Indians  of  the  neighbouring  province,  he  hastened 
to  the  place  destined  to  feel  the  weight  of  Spanish  indignation. 
With  little  resistance  he  overran  the  country:  the  despaii-ing 
natives    slew  themselves  with  their  own   weapons — in   other 

*  Charlevoix. 


24  HISTORY   OF    ST.    DOMINGO.  * 

instances,  prisoners  who  were  compelled  to  become  guides 
through  the  defiles  of  the  mountains,  threw  themselves  down 
headlong  to  avoid  the  treachery  to  which  they  were  compelled  ; 
in  many  cases  the  islanders  displayed  prodigious  courage  and 
equal  skill. 

At  length  the  seizure  of  the  cazique,  Cotubanama,  put  an 
end  to  the  war:  he  was  bi ought  to  the  capital  and  executed  as 
other,  rebels  against  the  government  had  been  before  j  and  in  him 
terminated  for  that  age,  the  race  of  native  Haytian  kings. 

The  lamentable  success  of  this  contest,  and  the  death  of 
queen  Isabella  in  Spain,  completed  the  misfortunes  of  the  isl- 
anders. 

Oppression  now  laid  an  iron  hand  upon  the  Indians ;  their  la- 
bour was  increased,  and  they  became  exposed  to  the  unrestrain- 
ed cruelty  of  those  who  with  a  singularly  ill  grace  called  the 
islanders  sai'a^cs.  They  were  given  as  property  by  Ferdinand  to 
his  grandees  and  favorites,  whose  agents  treated  them  as  so  many 
animals  destined  to  work  for  the  sole  purpose  of  enriching  their 
European  lords.  What  was  the  consequence  ?  The  accumula- 
tion indeed  of  treasure,  but  the  destruction  of  human  life.  In 
less  than  six  years,  sixty  thousand  American  families  were  redu- 
ced to  fourteen  thousand  j  and  of  the  native  population,  in  the 
course  of  fifteen  years,  there  remained  only  sixty  thousand  out 
of  a  million.  How  could  it  be  otherwise,  when  they  were  worn 
out  by  excessive  fatigue,  being  compelled  to  labour,  chained 
together  and  lashed  to  tasks,  under  which  their  untrained 
constitution  inevitably  sunk;  and  when  desperation  excited  them 
to  suicide  as  a  refuge  from  oppression  ? 

Roused  to  a  sense  of  danger  from  the  rapid  decrease  of  the 
population,  not  by  the  cries  of  humanity,  or  the  requirements  of 
outraged  religion,  their  oppressors  began  to  study  some  expedi- 
ent which  might  remove,  or  mitigate  at  least,  the  existing  ca- 
lamities ;  and  the  one  they  adopted  tends  to  display  even  more 
than  any  previous  transaction,  the  diabolical  principles  which  in- 
fluenced their  whole  conduct.  Arrested  in  their  cruelties  only 
by  the  overwhelming  conviction  that  in  the  total  extinction  of 
the  native  inhabitants  they  were  hastening  their  own  ruin,  did 


THE  LUCAYANS    ENTICED  TO  ST.  DOMINGO.    -        2o 

they  retrace  their  impious  steps,  adopt  measures  for  ameliora- 
ting the  condition  or  prolonging  the  lives  of  the  islanders,  and 
thus  eventually  multiplying  ihe  population  ? — Did  they,  smitten 
by  a  rebuking  conscience  within,  or  alarmed  lest  the  tempests 
that  frequently  burst  around  them  in  that  sultry  legion,  should  be 
commissioned  by  indignant  Heaven  to  launch  the  thunderbolt 
or  dart  the  lightning  upon  their  guilty  heads — aim  to  heal  the 
wounds  inflicied  by  the  chains  of  servitude,  with  which  they  had 
galled  and  destroyed  unoffending  thousands,  who,  but  for  them, 
migrht  have  been  at  ease  in  their  native  wilds?  O  no  ! — It  vras 
the  miserable /?o/icz/  of  their  ruler  to  supply  the  waste  of  human 
life  in  St.  Domingo,  by  adopting  a  system  of — what  shall  it  be 
called  ? — a  system  of  man-stealing,  practised  upon  the  unsus- 
pecting inhabitants  of  neighbouring  islands  which  had  been  un- 
fortunate  enough  to  be  discovered — now  to  be  sacrijiced  to  the 
Moloch  of  Spanish  avarice.     This  was  in  the  year  1507. 

It  might  seem  a  mere  anti-climax  to  talk  of  treachery  after 
recording  scenes  of  atrocious  murder,  but  in  fact  the  conduct  of 
the  colonists  to  the  Lucayans  involved  both  ;  and  the  treachery 
was  so  much  the  more  detestable,  as  it  was  committed  under  the 
sacred  name  of  religion.  They  were  persuaded  that  in  being 
transported  to  St.  Domingo,  they  should  meet  their  departed 
ancestors,  and  participate  with  them  in  the  blessedness  of  that 
happy  region  ;  and  in  consequence  of  this  statement,  more  than 
forty  thousand  were  seduced  to  share  the  blessedness  of  starving 
in  the  happy  region  of  avaricious  and  sanguinary  Spaniards.* 

In  the  year  1509,  Diego  Columbus,  the  son  of  the  great  dis- 
coverer, after  encountering  a  variety  of  obstacles  to  his  promo- 
tion, at  length  obtained  the  government  of  St.  Donnngo,  whither 
he  repaired  with  a  splendid  retinue.    Ovando  of  course  retired  : 

*  "  On  n'imagiiieroit  pas  les  fourberies,  qui  furent  mises  en  usage,  pour  engager 
ces  pauvres  iasulaiies  a  suivre  leurs  Tyrans.  La  plupart  les  assurerent  qu'ils 
venoieni  d'une  region  delicieuse,  oii  etoient  les  ames  de  leurs  parens  et  de  leurs 
amis  defuncts,  qui  les  invitoient  a  les  venir  joindre,  40,000  de  ces  barbares  furent 
assez  simple  pour  se  laisser  seduire  ;  mais  quand  ils  virent,  en  arrivanl  alEspag- 
iiole,  qu'on  les  avoit  abuses,  ils  en  congurent  un  chagrin  qui  en  fit  pgrir  un  grand 
nombre  et  porta  plusieurs  a  entreprendre  des  choees  incroyables  pourse  sauver.'' 
Charlevoix  Hist,  de  I'lsle  Espagnole,  torn.  2. 

5 


26  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

the  natives  experiencing  no  other  effect  from  the  change  than  a 
confirmation  of  their  slavery.  But  this  occasioned  a  powerful 
re-action  upon  their  masters,  who  finding  the  supplies  of  wealth 
proportionably  diminish  with  the  waste  of  life,  had  long  been 
engaged  in  other  speculations.  They  had  established  a  pearl- 
fishery  at  the  insignificant  island  of  Cabagua,  and  formed  a 
colony  on  the  continent  at  the  gulph  of  Darien.  Diego  propo- 
sed another  similar  establishment  in  Cuba,  an  island  which  was 
discovered  in  1492,  but  not  subdued  till  the  present  period  of 
1511,  when  Diego  de  Velasquez,  one  of  the  companions  of 
Columbus  in  his  second  voyage,  came  with  four  ships,  and  land- 
ed on  the  eastern  point.  * 

This  district  was  under  the  government  of  Hatuey,  a  native 
of  St.  Domingo,  who  had  fled  Ihither  with  multitudes  of  his 
countrymen,  as  to  an  asylum  from  the  despotic  dominion  of  the 
Castilians.  Having  observed  their  approach  from  a  distance, 
he  collected  together  the  bravest  of  his  followers  and  allies,  and 
used  every  argument  to  urge  them  to  a  vigourous  defence  of 
iheir  liberties.  He  suggested  at  the  same  time  the  necessity  of 
endeavoui  ing  to  propitiate  the  God  of  their  enemies.  "  Behold 
him  there,"  said  he,  pointing  to  a  vessel  filled  with  gold. ''behold 
that  mighty  divinity,  let  us  invoke  his  aid."  Upon  which  the 
people  danced  and  sung  before  the  rude  ore,  and  resigned  them- 
selves to  its  protection. 

But  Hatuey  again  addressed  them  and  the  caziques  in  these 
words,  "  We  must  not  expect  any  happiness  so  long  as  the  God 
of  the  Spaniards  remains  among  us.  He  is  no  less  our  enemy 
than  they.  They  seek  for  him  in  every  place  ;  and  where  they 
find  him  there  they  establish  themselves.  Were  he  hidden  in 
the  cavities  of  the  earth,  they  would  discover  him.  Were  we 
to  swallow  him,  they  would  plunge  their  hands  into  our  bowels 
and  drag  him  out.  There  is  no  place  but  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
that  can  elude  their  search.  When  he  is  no  longer  among  us, 
doubtless  we  shall  be  forgotten  by  them."  The  effect  of  this 
appeal  was  to  induce  every  one  to  throw  whatever  gold  he  pos- 
sessed into  the  sea. 

The  Spaniards  advanced,  and  having  soon  dispersed  their 


ANECDOTE    OF    HAGUEY. 


27 


opponents,  pursued  the  fugitive  Haguey  through  the  woods, 
where  they  took  him  and  condemned  him  to  be  burnt  as  a  re- 
bellious slave.  When  he  was  fastened  to  the  stake  previous  to 
the  kindling  of  the  flames,  a  Franciscan  friar  advanced  to  try  to 
convert  him,  and  promised  after  being  baptiz.-d,  that  he  should 
ascend  to  the  joys  of  paradise.  "  Are  there."  said  he,  "  any 
Spaniards  in  that  happy  place  ?"  The  friar  of  course  answered 
in  the  affirmaiive,  adding,  "but  there  are  none  but  good  ones." 
"  The  best  of  them,"  replied  Hatuey,  "  are  good  for  nothing. 
I  will  not  go  to  a  place  where  I  should  be  in  danger  of  meeting 
any  one  of  them.  Talk  no  more  to  me  of  your  religion,  but 
leave  me  to  die  !" — This  story  is  instructive — it  needs  no  com- 
ment— but  appeals  at  once  and  most  forcibly  to  every  enlight- 
ened mind  in  behalf  of  practical  religion. 

Political  artifices  at  home  perpetually  obstructed  the  measures 
of  Diego  in  his  government ;  and  at  length  Roderigo  Albuquer- 
que, a  relation  of  Zapata,  one  of  the  king's  confidential  servants, 
was  appointed  to  the  newly  created  office  of  distributing  the  re- 
partimentos  ;  upon  which  the  governor  determined  to  return 
to  Spain,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  redress,  which,  however, 
he  soon  found  was  not  likely  to  be  accorded.  Albuquerque 
was,  as  might  be  supposed,  a  being  of  extreme  selfishness,  for 
no  one  of  another  description  was  likely  to  be  a  court  favourite, 
and  to  obtain  a  commission  to  St.  Domingo.  He  ordered  the 
Indians  to  be  again  numbered,  and  sold  them  in  different  lots. 
They  now  amounted  only  to  fourteen  thousand,  and  the  mise- 
ries necessarily  consequent  upon  such  a  proceeding,  which  sepa- 
rated them  from  their  habitations  and  families,  and  exposed 
them  to  any  increased  labour  or  inhuman  treatment  which  their 
purchasers  might  impose,  were  highly  calculated  to  hasten  the 
period  of  their  extermination. 

To  the  honour  of  the  monks,  be  it  remembered,  that  they 
raised  their  voices  against  the  practices  of  their  countrymen. 
The  Franciscans  indeed,  were  silent,  or  acquiesced  in  the  exis- 
ting system  of  barbarity,  though  they  were  sent  to  preach  what 
indeed  they  did  not  understand  or  feel,  the  enlightened  princi- 
ples of  Christianity  J  but  the  Dominicans  advocated  the  righteous 


28  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

cause,  and  anathematized  from  their  pulpits  the  authors  of  such 
baseness,  injustice,  and  cruelty.  Both  parties  appealed  to  the 
king  :  the  Franciscans  triumphed,  and  Albuquerque  continued 
to  be  the  curse  of  the  island,  and  a  blot  in  creation. 

This  application,  however,  excited  the  benevolent  exertions 
of  Bartholomew  Las  Casas,  a  clergyman,  who  was  worthy  of  a 
belter  age.*  He  had  originally  come  to  the  island  at  the  pe- 
riod of  the  second  voyage  of  Columbus,  and  had  even  mani- 
fested a  deep  interest  in  the  state  of  its  aboriginal  inhabitants. 
INo  notice  being  taken  by  the  governor  of  his  representations, 
be  returned  to  Europe  for  the  express  purpose  of  appealing  on 
their  behalf  to  the  emperor  Charles  V.  with  whom  and  with 
cardinal  Ximenes,  the  regent,  he  was  so  successful,  that  three 
superintendents  of  the  colonies  were  appointed  in  conjunction 
with  Zuazo  a  lawyer,  and  Las  Casas  himself,  distinguished  by 
the  flattering  but  well  merited  title  of  protector  of  the  Indians. 
Upon  their  arrival  in  1517,  they  immediately  commenced  the 
liberation  of  those  natives  which  had  been  bestowed  on  the 
Spanish  courtiers  or  persons  not  resident  in  America  ;  but  when 
the  rod  of  power  ceased  to  compel  them,  they  naturally 
ceased  to  labour,  and  the  colony  suffered  proportionate  dis- 
advantage. 

Las  Casas  still  anxious  for  the  more  complete  emancipation 
of  the  natives,  deemed  it  necessary  again  to  repair  to  bpain, 
and  prevailed  on  the  emperor  to  recal  the  superintendent  and 
Zuazo,  and  substitute  Roderigo  de  Figuerra  or  Figueron  as 
chief  justice  of  the  island,  with  orders  to  mitigate  their  suffer- 


*  "  C'eloit  un  bomme  d'une  erudition  sure,  d'un  esprit  solide,  d'un  nafurel  ar^ 
deut,  d'un  courage  que  les  difficult^3  faisoient  croitre  et  d'une  vertu  herolque  rien 
ir'etoit  capable  de  lui  f;iire  cliaiiger  de  seuliment,  quand  tl  etoit  persuade  qu'il  y 
alloit  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu  de  le  soutenir ;  et  comnie  il  avoit  rendu  a  la  religion 
et  a  i'estat  des  services  essentiels  dans  I'isle  de  Cuba,  son  credit  etoit  grand  dans 
toutesleslndes.  Son  seul  defaut  etoit  d'avoir  I'imagination  trop  vive  et  de  s'en 
trop  laisser  dominer.  Un  hommc  de  ce  caracteue  ne  pouvoit  gueres  manqucr 
d'enlrer  dans  les  sentiraens  de  PP.  de  St  Dominique,  et  personne  n'ttoit  plus 
propre  a  pousser  vivement  cette  attaire  comrae  il  fit,  sans  se  laisser  jamais,  jus- 
qu'a  la  mort." — Charlevoix. 


PROJECT    OF    LAS    CASAS.  29 

ings.  Thus  as  the  Abbe  Raynal  remarks,*  "  he  was  continually 
hurrying  from  one  hemisphere  to  the  other,  in  order  to  com- 
fort those  for  whom  he  had  conceived  such  an  attachment,  or 
to  soften  their  tyrants.  The  inutility  of  his  efforts  convinced 
him  that  he  siioujd  never  do  any  good  in  settlements  that  were 
already  formed  ;  and  he  proposed  to  himself  to  establish  a  colo- 
ny upon  a  new  foundation. 

"  His  colonists  were  all  to  be  planters,  artificers,  or  missiona- 
ries. No  one  was  to  be  allowed  to  mix  with  them  without  his 
consent.  A  particular  dress,  ornamented  with  a  cross,  was  to 
prevent  them  from  being  thought  to  belong  to  that  race  of 
Spaniards  which  had  rendered  itself  so  odious.  He  reckoned 
that  with  these  kinds  of  knights  he  should  be  able  without  war, 
violence,  or  slavery,  to  civilize  the  Indians,  to  convert  them,  to 
accustom  them  to  labour,  and  even  to  employ  them  in  working 
the  mines.  He  asked  no  assistance  from  the  treasury  at  first, 
and  he  was  afterwards  satisfied  with  the  twelfth  of  the  tributes 
which  he  should  sooner  or  later  bring  into  it. 

"  The  ambitious  who  govern  empires,  consider  the  people  as 
mere  objects  of  trade,  and  treat  as  chimerical  every  thing  that 
tends  to  the  improvement  and  happiness  of  the  human  species. 
Such  was,  at  first,  the  impression  which  the  system  of  Las  Casas 
made  upon  the  Spanish  ministry.  He  was  not  discouraged  by 
denials,  and  at  length  succeeded  in  having  the  district  of  Cu- 
mana  ceded  to  him,  to  put  his  theory  in  practice.  This  man 
of  ardent  genius  immediately  went  through  all  the  provinces  of 
Castile,  in  order  to  collect  men  accustomed  to  the  labours  of 
the  field  and  to  those  of  manufactures.  But  these  peaceful 
citizens  had  not  so  eager  a  desire  to  leave  their  country  as  sol- 
diers or  sailors  have.  Scarce  could  he  prevail  upon  two  hun- 
dred of  them  to  follow  him.  With  these  he  set  sail  for  America, 
and  landed  at  Porto  Rico,  in  1519,  after  a  fortunate  voyage. 

*'  Although  Las  Casas  had  only  quitted  the  new  hemisphere 
two  years  before,  yet  he  found  a  total  alteration  in  it  at  his 
return.     The  entire  destruction  of  the  Indians  in  the   islands 

*  History  of  the  Settlements  and  Trade  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  Book  7. 


30  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

subject  to  Spain,  had  excited  the  resolution  of  going  to  the 
conlinent  in  search  of  slaves,  to  replace  the  unfortunate  meii 
who  had  perished  from  oppression.  This  cruelty  disgusted  the 
independent  minds  of  the  savages.  In  the  height  of  their  re- 
sentment, they  massacred  a.«  many  of  the  Spaniards  as  fell  into 
their  hands  by  chance  ;  and  two  missionaries,  who  probably 
CLme  to  Cumana  with  a  laudable  design,  were  the  victims  of 
these  just  retaliations.  Ocampo  immediately  went  from  St. 
Domingo  to  punish  an  outrage  committed,  as  it  was  said, 
against  Heaven  itself;  and  after  having  destroyed  all  by  fire  and 
sword,  he  built  a  village  upon  the  spot,  which  he  called  Toledo. 

"  It  was  within  these  weak  palisades  that  Las  Casas  was  obliged 
to  plar.e  the  small  number  of  his  companions  who  had  resisted 
the  intemperance  of  the  climate,  and  ihe  attempts  made  to 
seduce  them  from  him.  Their  residence  was  not  long  here. 
Most  of  them  were  pierced  with  the  darts  of  an  implacable 
enemy  ;  and  those  who  escaped  were  forced  in  1521  to  seek  an 
as}lum  somewhere  else." 

The  impolitic  cruelty  of  the  European  settlers  who  regarded 
the  bluod  of  humanity  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  accu- 
mulation of  wealth,  together  with  the  rapid  progress  of  the 
small-pox,  continued  to  hasten  the  decline  of  the  island;  so 
that  by  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  ^scarcely  a  hundred 
and  fifty  of  the  natives  remained.  The  city  of  St.  Domingo 
presented  however  a  splendid  and  prosperous  appearance  amidst 
the  surrounding  desolation  of  the  empire.  It  is  described  in 
1528,  as  not  inferior  to  any  in  Spain  :  the  houses  being  built  of 
stone  and  fit  for  the  reception  of  any  nobleman,  and  the  palace 
of  Don  Diego  adapted  for  the  reception  of  an  European  mo- 
narch. The  cathedral  was  of  exquisite  workmanship,  and  well 
endowed  ;  the  dignity  of  its  bishop  and  canons  well  supported. 
There  were  three  monasteries  dedicated  to  St  Dominic,  St. 
Francis,  and  St.  Mary  de  Mercedes,  and  a  hospital  founded  by 
Michael  Passamont,  the  treasurer-general.* 

*  Account  of  the  Spauish  writer  Oviedo,  with  whom  the  other  Historiems  per- 
fectly agree. 


DECLINING    STATE   OF    THE    ISLAND.  31 

In  1586,  Queen  Elizabeth  of  England  desirous  of  crippling 
the  power  of  Spain,  especially  in  the  West  Indies,  dispatched 
the  celebrated  admiral  Sir  Francis  Drake,  who  seized  upon  St. 
Jago,  Carthagena,  St.  Domingo,  and  various  other  places,  and 
captured  many  valuable  ships.  Of  St.  Domingo  he  held  pos- 
session a  month,  during  the  latter  part  of  which  terrible  reign, 
every  means  were  adopted  to  effect  the  destruction  of  the  most 
beautiful  buildings,  till  one-third  of  the  town  only  having  been 
ruined,  the  conquerors  accepted  of  seven  thousand  pounds  sterl- 
ing as  a  ransom  for  the  remaining  part. 

The  Government  of  Spain  becoming  extremely  negligent  of 
this  and  other  colonies,  they  sunk  into  a  state  of  inactivity, 
having  neither  the  spirit  to  quit  their  situation,  nor  to  pursue 
any  kind  of  improvement.  In  consequence  of  their  licentious- 
ness, a  race  of  people  sprung  up  of  every  degree  of  coloui,  and 
only  worthy  of  being  called  semi-barbarians.  The  mines  were 
unused, — the  cultivation  of  the  land  altogether  abandoned  ;  and 
the  inhabitants  became  habituated  to  piratical  depradations  and 
illegal  trade;  and  the  Spanish  court  sought  its  revenge  in  the 
demolition  of  the  sea  ports,  instead  of  devising  a  remedy  by  a 
renovated  system  of  government.  The  islanders  were  conse- 
quently driven  into  the  interior  where  they  lived  in  mean  habi- 
tations, without  clothes,  and  upon  precarious  methods  of  subsis- 
tence. In  this  state,  they  beheld  the  close  of  the  sixteenth 
century. 


N 


CHAP.  U. 

FROM    THE    YEAR    1600    TO    THE    PEACE    OF    RYSWICK    IN    1697. 

The  English  and  the  French  go  to  the  West  Indies. — Expelled  from 
St.  Christopher'' s  by  Toledo. — The  remnant  of  those  dispersed,  settle 
at  Tortiiga. — Account  *of  the  Buccaneers. — The  English  party  ex- 
pelled from  Tortuga,and  the  French  retain  possession — Anecdotes 
of  Peter  le  Grand. — Michael  de  Basco  and  others. — Montbar  and 
Morgan. — The  French  colony  settled  in  1665,  tinder  the  judicious 
goverjiment  of  Bertrand  D^Ogeron. — His  character  and  conduct. — 
His  tvish  to  subdue  the  tchole  island  for  France. — His  death  at 
Paris. — Account  of  his  successois. — Fi7st  regular  cessiofi  of  the 
teestern  part  of  the  island  to  the  French  at  the  peace  of  Ryswick. 

After  making  some  efforts  to  subdue  the  Caribs,  or  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Windward  islands,  which  were  not  always  successful, 
and  finding  that  no  gold  mines  were  to  be  obtained,  and  that 
the  people  died  when  reduced  to  slavery,  the  Spaniards  con- 
tented themselves  with  stopping  all  European  ships  that  sailed 
beyond  the  tropics,  determined  that  no  other  nation  should  share 
in  their  adventures  or  possessions.  The  English  and  French, 
whose  mutual  jealousies  have  so  often  kept  them  asunder^  united 
however  upon  this  occasion  to  check  these  piratical  settlers ; 
already  were  they  acquainted  with  the  Windward  islands,  but 
had  never  yet  adopted  any  measure  with  a  view  to  occupy  them. 
At  length  some  Englishmen,  headed  by  a  leader  named  War- 
ner, and  some  Frenchmen  under  the  captain  of  a  Fiench  pri- 
vateer, named  Desnambuc,  landed  at  St.  Christopher's  on  the 
same  day  at  two  opposite  points  of  the  island,  and  divided  it 
between  them;  while  the  natives  retired  before  their  invaders, 
bantering  Ihem  for  coming  to  such  a  distance  to  seek  land 
among  savages,  which  they  intimated  must  of  course  be  very 
scarce  with  them. 

These  transactions  excited  no  little  alarm  in  Spain ;  and 
Frederic  Toledo,  who  was  going  with  a  powerful  fleet  to  attack 


OCCUPATION  OF  TORTUGA.  33 

the  Dutch  in  Brazil  in  1630,  was  ordered  to  destroy  these  new 
settlers  in  his  way.  This  was  not  a  very  difficult  undertaking. 
They  had  no  adequate  means  of  resistance,  and  they  were  all 
either  killed,  taken  prisoners,  or  dispersed.  Of  the  latter  most 
returned,  after  the  immediate  danger,  from  the  neighbouring 
islands  whither  they  had  tied.  Spain,  probably  from  the  belief 
that  they  were  pretty  well  annihilated,  or  at  least,  reduced  to 
total  insignificance,  no  longer  interfering  with  them,  a  few  re- 
mained at  Tortuga,  a  small  and  barren  island  to  the  north-west 
of  St.  Domingo,  within  a  few  leagues  of  Port  de  Paix.  The 
Caribs  were  usually  considered,  at  the  earliest  period  of  Euro- 
pean settlement,  as  the  common  enemy,  against  whom  both 
French  and  English  united  ;  but  artfully  availing  themselves  of 
subsequent  disputes,  they  sometimes  joined  one  nation  and 
sometimes  the  other,  by  which  means  they  had  only  one  enemy 
at  a  time  instead  of  two.  In  the  mean  time,  the  mother  coun- 
tries continued  to  neglect  their  subjects  in  the  new  world,  in  con- 
sequence of  which,  in  January,  1660,  an  alliance  was  forn)ed, 
securing  to  each  those  possessions  w'hich  war  had  thrown  into 
their  hands.  This  was  accompanied  with  an  offensive  and  de- 
fensive league  to  compel  the  natives  of  the  country  to  join  them. 
France  obtained  Guadaloupe,  Martinico,  Granada,  and  some 
others :  to  England  were  allotted  Barbadoes,  Nevis,  Antigua, 
Montserrat,  with  a  few  inconsiderable  islands.    St.  Christopher's 

belonsred  to  both,     The  Caribs  were  confined  to  Dominica  and 

*    . 
St.  Vincent's,  and  did  not  at  this  period  exceed  in  number  six 

thousand  men. 

The  French  and  English  planters,  whom  we  have  just  men- 
tioned as  occupying  the  small  island  of  Tortuga,  after  their  ex- 
pulsion from  St.  Christopher's,  were  joined  by  a  number  of., 
Dutch  emigrants  from  Santa  Cruz,  who  had  been  compelled  in 
the  same  manner  to  roam  the  ocean  in  search  of  a  shelter  from 
Spanish  vengeance,  after  their  numbers  had  been  considerably 
diminished.  "Companions  in  adversity,"  says  Mr.  Edwards, 
"  their  misfortunes  probably  taught  these  poor  exiles,  mutual 
forbearance ;  for  although  they  were  composed  of  three  differ- 
ent nations,  they  appear  to  have  lived  for  some  years  in  perfect 

6 


34  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

harmony  with  each  other.  Their  mode  of  life  contributed  to 
produce  the  same  beneficial  effect :  finding  a  country  of  im- 
measurable extent  in  their  neighbourhood,  abounding  in  cattle, 
their  time  was  chiefly  occupied  in  hunting;  an  emp!()yn)ent 
which  left  no  leisure  for  dissension,  and  affurd«^d  them  both  ex- 
ercise and  food.  The  plains  of  St.  Domingo  were  considered, 
however,  merely  as  their  hunting  grounds:  Tortuga  continued 
their  home  and  place  of  retreat.  Here  their  women  and  young 
people  cultivated  small  plantations  of  tobacco,  (an  herb,  of 
■which  in  hot  and  moist  climates,  the  practice  of  inhaling  the 
smoke  seems  to  be  pointed  out  by  nature);  and  as  the  coast  was 
rugged,  and  of  difiicult  approach,  they  fondly  hoped  that  their 
obscurity  would  protect  them  from  further  persecution. 

"  If  the  government  of  Spain  had  been  actuated  at  this  time 
by  molives  of  wisdom,  it  would  indeed  have  left  these  poor  peo- 
ple to  range  over  the  wilderness  unmolested.  It  ought  to  have 
known,  that  the  occupation  of  hunting,  diverted  them  from  pro- 
jects of  vengeance  and  deeds  of  greater  enterprize;  but  tyranny 
is  without  foresight,  and  the  restless  and  remorseless  bigotry  of 
the  Spanish  nation,  allowed  the  fugitives  no  respite.  An  arma- 
ment was  collected,  and  preparations  made  to  effect  their  utter 
extermination;  the  commanders  of  which,  taking  occasion  when 
the  ablest  of  the  men  had  resorted  to  the  larger  island  in  their 
usual  pursuit,  landed  a  body  of  soldiers  at  Tortuga,  and  making 
captives  of  the  women  and  children,  the  old^nd  infirm,  caused 
them  all  to  be  massacred  without  mercy. 

*'  It  does  not  appear  that  the  miserable  people  who  were  thus 
pursued  to  destruction,  like  beasts  of  prey,  had  hitherto  been 
guilty  of  any  outrages  or  depredations  on  the  ships  or  subjects  of 
Spain,  which  called  for  such  exemplary  vengeance.  Neither 
was  it  imputed  to  them,  as  a  crimr,  that  they  had  possessed 
themselves  of  Tortuga,  or  that  they  roamed  about  the  deserts 
of  St.  Domingo  in  pursuit  of  cattle  which  had  no  owners.  Their 
guilt  consisted  in  the  circumstance  of  being  born  out  of  the 
Spanish  territories,  and  presuming  neverthekss  to  venture  into 
any  part  of  the  new  world ;  for  the  arrogant  presumption  and 
extravagant  selfishness  of  this  bigotted  nation,  led  them  to  ap- 


THE    BUCCANEERS.  25 

propriate  all  the  countries  of  America  to  themselves.  They 
claimed  even  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  of  sailing  on  any  such 
part  of  the  ocean  as,  in  their  judgment,  constituted  a  portion  of 
the  newly-discovered  hemisphere  ;  and  strict  orders  were  issued 
to  all  their  commanders,  by  sea  and  land,  to  seize  on  the  ships 
and  subjects  of  all  other  people  that  should  be  found  within  the 
boundaries  which  they  had  prescribed,  and  to  punish  the  intruders 
with  slavery  or  death. 

"  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  no  alternative  remained  to  the 
occupiers  of  Tortuga,  but  to  turn  on  their  pursuers,  and  wage 
offensive  war  on  those  who  would  allow  of  no  peace  with  them. 
If  the  justice  of  the  cause  be  still  a  question,  let  the  records 
of  time  be  consulted  :  let  an  appeal  be  made  to  that  rule  of 
conduct,  which,  (to  use  an  eloquent  expression  of  Lord  Coke,) 
is  written  by  the  finger  of  God  on  the  heart  of  man  ;  and  let  his- 
tory and  reason  determine  whether  any  instance  of  hostility,  in 
the  annals  of  mankind,  can  be  defended  on  better  grounds. 
To  such  men,  in  such  a  cause,  no  dangers  were  too  formida- 
ble, no  obstacles  too  great.  Inured  by  their  mode  of  life  to  the 
vicissitudes  of  climate,  united  among  themselves,  and  animated 
by  all  ihe  motives  and  passions  which  can  inflame  the  human 
mind  to  great  exertion,  they  became  the  most  formidable  anta- 
gonists which  the  Spaniards  had  ever  encountered,  and  display- 
ed such  deeds  of  valour  and  successful  enterprize  as  (all  cir- 
cumstances considered)  have  never  been  equalled  before  or 
since." 

These  people  were  called  Buccaneers,*  because  they  imitated 
the  custom  of  savages  in  drying  the  food  they  lived  upon  by 
smoke  over  fires  of  green  wood,  in  places  designated  from  this 
practice  by  the  Spanish  term  buccan.     They  are  described  by 

*  This  term  is  commonly  used  as  synonymous  with  frecbootRrs,  but  in  strict 
propriety,  tiiey  apply  to  different  classes  of  people.  The  former  name  is  particu- 
larly applied  to  the  French  inhabitants  in  Si .  Di  mingo.  Anciently  the  island  was 
peopled  i)y  four  descriptions  of  men — 1.  The  l)uccaneers,  whose  employment  was 
to  hunt  the  bulls  or  wild  boars  in  the  woods. — 2.  The  freebooters  who  roamed  the 
seas,  and  were  in  fact  pirates  ;  both  these  classes  of  people  were  of  a  warlike 
character.— 3.  The  hushandimn  who  devoted  theajselves  to  the  cultivation  of  th« 
land.— 4.  The  slaves. 


36  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

the  Abb^  Raynal  in  the  following  manner.  "  As  they  had  no 
wives  nor  children,  they  usually  associated  two  in  a  company, 
to  assist  one  another  in  family  duties.  In,  these  societies  pro- 
perty was  common,  and  the  last  survivor  inherited  all  that  re- 
mained. Theft  was  unknown  among  them,  though  no  precau- 
tions were  taken  against  it ;  and  what  was  wanting  at  home  was 
freely  borrowed  from  some  of  the  neighbours,  without  any  other 
restriction  than  that  of  a  previous  intimation,  if  they  were  at 
home,  if  not,  of  making  them  acquainted  with  it  at  their  return. 
Caesar  found  in  Gaul  the  same  custom,  which  bears  the  double 
character,  both  of  a  primitive  state,  in  which  every  thing  was 
in  common,  and  of  times  posterior  to  that  in  which  the  idea 
of  private  property  was  known  and  respected.  Differences 
seldom  arose,  and,  when  they  did,  were  easily  adjusted.  If  the 
parties,  however,  were  obstinate,  they  decided  the  matter  by 
fire-arras.  If  the  ball  entered  at  the  back  or  the  sides,  it  was 
considered  as  a  mark  of  treachery,  and  the  assassin  was  imme- 
diately put  to  death  The  former  laws  of  the  country  were 
disregarded,  and  by  the  usual  sea  baptism  they  had  received  in 
passing  the  tropic,  they  considered  themselves  exempted  from 
all  obligation  to  obey  them.  These  adventurers  had  even 
quilted  their  family  name  to  assume  others,  borrowed  from 
times  of  war,  most  of  which  have  been  transmitted  to  their 
posterity. 

"  The  dress  of  these  barbarians  consisted  of  a  shirt  dipped 
in  the  blood  of  the  animals  they  killed  in  hunting ;  a  pair  of 
drawers  dirtier  than  the  shirt,  and  made  in  the  shape  of  a  brew- 
er's apron  ;  a  girdle  made  of  leather,  on  which  a  very  short 
sabre  was  hung,  and  some  knives;  a  hat  without  any  rim,  except 
a  flap  before,  in  order  to  take  hold  of  it;  and  shoes  without 
stockings.  Their  ambition  was  satisfied,  if  they  could  but  pro- 
vide themselves  with  a  gun  that  carried  balls  of  an  ounce 
weight,  and  with  a  pack  of  about  five-and-twenty  or  thirty  dogs. 

"The  buccaneers  spent  their  life  in  hunting  the  wild  bulls, 
of  which  there  were  great  numbers  in  the  island,  since  the  Span- 
iards had  brought  them.  The  best  parts  of  these  animals,  when 
seasoned  with  pimento  and  orange  juice,  were  the  most  com- 


SEPARATION  OF  THE  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH.         37 

mon  food  of  their  des^j-oyers,  who  had  forgotten  the  use  of 
bread,  and  who  had  nothing  but  water  to  drink.  The  hides  of 
these  animals  were  conveyed  to  several  ports,  and  bought  by  the 
navigators.  They  were  carried  thither  by  men  who  were  called 
engages,  or  bondsmen,  a  set  of  persons  who  were  used  to  sell 
themselves  in  Europe  to  serve  as  slaves  in  the  colonies  during 
the  term  of  three  years." 

During  the  time  in  which  the  French  and  English  buccaneers 
were  united,  they  appointed  a  leader  of  the  latter  nation,  of  the 
name  of  Willis ;  but  no  sooner  was  a  governor  general  sent  to 
the  French  Windward  islands,  than  he  fitted  out  a  force  from  St. 
Vincent's,  which  being  joined  by  the  Frenchmen  on  the  island, 
ordered  the  English  to  quit  it.  They  instantly  obeyed  and  never 
returned,  but  pursuing  their  former  career,  they  finally  obtained 
regular  commissions  from  the  British  government  to  act  against 
the  common  enemy. 

At  length,  after  alternate  reverses  and  successes  in  their  con- 
tests with  the  Spaniards,  the  French  retained  the  island  of  Tor- 
tuga,  and  spread  themselves  on  the  northern  coast  of  St.  Domin- 
go, of  which  they  retained  a  firm  possession  :  the  English  went 
to  Jamaica.  These  banditti  were  formed  into  companies  con- 
sisting of  fifty,  a  hundred,  or  a  hundred  and  fifty  men  each,  who 
took  their  predatory  excursions  in  boats,  generally  of  a  very 
small  size.  It  was  their  custom  to  board  every  ship  they  could 
discover,  of  whatever  size,  and  such  was  the  terror  they  inspired, 
that  the  moment  they  had  fixed  the  grappling,  the  ship  was  al- 
most certain  of  being  captured.  Their  enmity  to  the  Spaniards 
was  implacable ;  they  attacked  them  at  all  limes  :  if  the  cargo 
proved  to  be  a  rich  one,  the  crew  were  suffered  to  live,  otherwise 
they  were  frequently  thrown  into  the  sea.  Several  anecdotes 
are  preserved  respecting  them,  of  which  we  shall  select  the  fol- 
lowing. 

Peter  le  Grand,  a  native  of  Dieppe,  with  only  four  pieces  of 
cannon  and  twenty-eiglit  men  in  his  boat,  attacked  the  vice-ad- 
miral of  the  galleons.  Having  first  given  orders  to  sink  his  own 
vessel,  he  boarded  that  of  his  antagonist,  and  the  Spaniards  were 
so  astonished  at  this  boldness  that  they  were  paralized  into  inac- 


38  HISTORY    OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

tivity.  When  he  ca-iie  to  the  captain's  cabin,  be  presented  a 
pistol  to  him,  and  demanded  an  instant  surrender.  The  ter- 
rified and  unresisting  comtnander,  with  the  greatest  part  of  the 
cievv,  they  landed  at  the  nearest  cape,  reserving  only  a  sufficient 
number  of  sailors  to  work  the  ship. 

Michael  de  Basco,  Jonqu6,  and  Lawrence  le  GraiF,  were 
cruising  before  Carthagena,  with  three  small  bad  vessels,  when 
two  men-of-war  sailed  out  of  the  harbour  to  attack  these  free- 
booters and  bring  them  live  or  dead.  The  Spaniards,  however, 
were  miserably  deceived  in  their  anticipations,  for  they  were 
taken  prisoners  themselves;  the  ships  were  retained,  but  the 
crews  sent  back  with  scorn,  and  bearing  all  the  shame  of  so 
mortifying  a  defeat. 

Another  singular  specimen  of  daring  courage  is  recorded. 
Michael  and  Brouage  having  heard  of  a  valuable  cargo  being 
shipped  from  Carthagena,  in  vessels  carrying  a  foreign  flag,  for 
the  purpose  of  preserving  it  from  their  rapacity,  attacked  the 
ships  and  plundered  them.  The  Dutch  captains  exasperated 
at  being  captured  by  such  an  inferior  force,  told  one  of  the 
buccaneers,  that  ifhe  had  been  alone,  he  would  not  have  ventur- 
ed upon  the  attack ;  then  replied  he,  "  let  us  begin  the  fight 
again,  and  my  companion  shall  remain  a  quiet  spectator  of  the 
engagement.  If  I  should  conquer  again;  both  your  ships  shall 
also  be  mine."  This  challenge,  however  was  not  accepted, 
and  the  Dutchman  very  gladly  made  off. 

The  Spanish  colonies  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  despair  by 
these  hordes  of  desperadoes,  which  only  tended  to  inspire  them 
with  increasing  confidence ;  and  no  longer  confining  their  depre- 
dations to  the  sea,  they  laid  waste  the  richest  and  most  popu- 
lous countries  of  the  continent.  The  spirit  of  the  haughty 
Spaniards  was  at  length  so  depressed,  that  they  maintained  no 
other  communication  with  the  mother  country  than  that  of  a 
single  ship,  which  alone  ventured  upon  the  perilous  navigation. 
Of  the  three  most  distinguished  heroes  of  this  piratical  history, 
the  reader  will  accept  a  brief  notice  :  the  subject  being  inti- 
mately connected  with  an  account  of  St.  Domingo. 

A  gentleman  of  Languedoc,  whose  name  was  Montbar,  acquir- 


MONTBAR.  39 

ed  particular  distinction  among  his  people.  From  his  earliest 
youth,  he  had  imbibed  the  utmost  detestation  for  the  Spaniards, 
as  the  authors  of  those  enormities  which  had  been  so  long  prac- 
tised in  the  West  Indies.  When  at  college,  he  is  said  to  have 
manifested  this  feeling  in  an  extreme  degree,  for  being  called  to 
act  the  part  of  a  Frenchman  in  a  play,  in  which  he  was  to  quarrel 
with  a  Spaniard,  he  was  transported  so  suddenly  from  fictitious 
representation  to  the  exercise  of  real  hatred,  that  the  poor  youth 
who  personated  the  Spaniard,  was  almost  strangled  before  he 
could  be  rescued  from  his  fury.  This  feeling  increased  with  his 
years,  and  nothing  could  atlength  satisfy  him  till  he  quiited  his  na- 
tive shores  to  join  the  banditti  of  buccaneers,  of  whom  he  had  heard 
as  being  confederated  against  the  objects  of  his  own  inveterate  ab- 
horrence. Having  met  a  Spanish  ship  on  their  way,  they  instant- 
ly attacked,  and  boarded  it.  Muntbar  was  the  first  to  rush  upon 
the  enemy's  deck,  sword  in  hand.  Nothing  could  resist  his 
impetuosity,  or  arrest  his  progress  till  he  had  twice  hurried  from 
one  end  of  the  ship  to  the  other,  cutting  down  every  thing  that 
opposed  him.  The  booty,  rich  as  it  proved,  was  no  temptation 
to  his  romantic  spirit,  which  only  hovered  with  satisfaction  over 
the  many  Spaniards  that  had  fallen  before  his  victorious  sabre. 

Soon  after  this  encounter,  they  arrived  upon  the  French  coast 
of  St.  Domingo,  where  the  buccaneers  apologized  for  the  small 
supply  of  refreshments  they  furnished  that  the  Spaniards  had 
laid  waste  their  settlements.  This  was  sufficient  to  enrage  Mont- 
bar,  already  enough  excited  by  a  knowledge  of  their  inhumani- 
ties; and  he  indignantly  demanded  why  they  suffered  such  in- 
sults.? To  which  they  replied,  "we  do  not;  the  Spaniards  have 
experienced  what  kind  of  men  we  are,  and  have  therefore  taken 
advantage  of  the  time  we  were  engaged  in  hunting.  But  we 
are  going  to  join  some  of  our  companions  who  have  been  still 
more  ill  treated  than  we,  and  then  we  shall  have  warm  work." 
"  If  you  approve  it,"  said  Montbar,  ''I  will  head  you,  not  as  your 
commander,  but  as  the  foremost  to  expose  myself  to  danger.'' 
To  this  they  readily  assented ;  and  having  overtaken  the  ene- 
my on  the  same  day,  Montbar  displayed  such  bravery,  that  they 
were  struck  with  astonishment  and  admiration.     He  was  more 


40  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

than  bold,  he  was  furious,  and  drove  on  with  irresistible  impetu^ 
osity.  Nor  was  this  the  only  occasion  wherein  he  manifested 
such  a  determined  and  enthusiastic  character,  his  whole  remain- 
ing life,  which  he  passed  among  his  new  friends  was  marked  by 
a  similar  energy,  and  the  Spaniards,  sufficiently  terrified  at  his 
performances,  distinguished  him  by  the  epithet  o^  exterminator. 
His  zeal  inspired  the  buccaneers  with  a  resolution  of  attempting 
more  than  merely  repelling  the  Spaniards  from  their  settle- 
ment ;  they  henceforth  determined  to  attack  them  in  their  own 
territory,  which,  as  it  required  superior  forces,  led  them  to  form 
more  extensive  and  numerous  associations.  In  these,  Lolonois, 
who  was  named  from  the  sands  of  Olone,  the  place  of  his  birth, 
and  Michael  de  Basco,  were  the  two  most  celebrated  leaders. 
The  former,  from  a  bondsman,  had  raised  himself  to  the  com- 
mand of  two  canoes,  and  took  a  Spanish  frigate  on  the  coast  of 
Cuba  J  and  soon  afterwards,  four  other  ships  lying  at  Port-au- 
prince,  which  had  been  fitted  out  on  purpose  to  sail  in  pursuit  of 
him  ;  the  latter  captured  a  Spanish  ship,  under  the  very  cannon 
of  Porto  Bello,  valued  at  five  or  six  millions  of  livres,  that  is,  be- 
tweerl  two  hundred  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds. 

These  two  adventurers  having  united  their  forces,  and  being 
joined  by  four  hundred  and  forty  men,  sailed  to  the  bay  of  Vene- 
zuela, and  put  the  whole  garrison  consisting  of  two  hundred  and 
fifty  men  to  the  sword.  Thence  proceeding  to  Maracaybo, 
built  on  the  western  coast  of  the  lake  of  that  name  at  ten  leagues 
from  its  mouth,  they  found  it  deserted  by  the  terrified  inhabi- 
tants who  had  retired  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay.  Enraged 
at  the  disappointment,  they  set  fire  to  Gibraltar  after  considera- 
ble resistance ;  but  the  inhabitants  had  availed  themselves  of  a 
fortnight  which  the  banditti  had  devoted  to  dissipation,  to 
remove  their  most  valuable  property.  Maracaybo  was  saved  by 
a  sum  being  paid  for  its  ransom  ;  besides  which,  they  carried 
off  all  the  crosses,  pictures  and  bells  of  the  churches,  in  order 
to  furnish,  as  they  stated,  a  chapel  which  they  intended  to  erect 
in  Tortuga.  Banditti?  consecrating  a  place  of  divine  worship 
with  the  spoils  of  sacrilege — O  tempora  !  O  mores  ! ! 

We  are  here  introduced  to  the  first  exploit  of  Morgan,  a 


ADVENTURES    OF    MORGAN.  41 

Welchman,  and  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  bucraneers. 
He  was  descended  from  respectable  parents  in  G!amorg;ansljire, 
whence  be  soon  went  to  Biistol  in  the  spirit  of  adventure,  and 
apprenticing  himself  to  serve  a  planter  for  four  years,  he  sailed 
for  the  West  Indies.  At  the  expiration  of  his  lime,  he  joined 
the  brethren  of  the  coast,  as  the  buccaneers  designated  themselves, 
and  at  the  time  when  they  were  rioting  amidst  the  spoils  of 
Venezuela  and  the  neighbouring  places,  he  sailed  from  Jan;aica 
to  attack  Porto  Bello,  which  he  captured  by  surprise.  The 
fort,  however,  was  not  yet  in  his  power,  but  he  attempted  to 
gain  it  by  the  artifice  of  compelling  the  women  and  priests  to 
fix  the  scaling  ladders,  from  a  conviction  that  the  Spaniards 
would  not  fire  at  persons  so  loved  and  reverenced.  But  the 
garrison  were  not  to  be  deceived  into  submission,  and  were  only 
conquered  by  force  of  arms. 

Panama  was  the  next  object  of  Morgan's  ambition  ;  to  secure 
which,  he  deemed  it  necessary  to  procure  guides  from  the 
island  of  St.  Catharine,  whither  the  Spaniards  were  accustomed 
to  transport  their  malefactors.  This  place,  which  was  capable 
of  resisting  for  a  longtime  even  the  niost  skiiCul  commander, 
was  treacherously  given  up  to  our  adventurer.  Hence  he  steer- 
ed to  the  river  Chagre ;  at  the  entrance  of  which  was  a  fort 
built  upon  a  rock,  and  well  defended  by  a  garrison  which  had 
an  officer  of  distinguished  abilities.  The  freebooters,  however 
succeeded,  in  consequence  of  the  commander  being  killed,  and 
the  fort  accidentally  taking  fire. 

Morgan  sailed  on  in  boats  to  Cruces,  and  then  proceeded  by 
land  to  Panama,  then  distant  only  five  leagues.  In  the  plain 
before  the  city,  he  instantly  put  to  flight  a  large  body  of  troops, 
and  entered  the  place  without  further  resistance.  Here  he 
found  prodigious  tieasuies  secreted  in  wells,  caves,  and  adja- 
cent forests  :  but  the  short  residence  of  his  party  was  disgraced 
by  outrages  and  barbarities,  exercised  for  the  puipose  of  extort- 
ing from  the  Spaniards,  Negroes,  and  Indians,  the  places  where 
they  had  concealed  the  wealth  of  their  respective  masters. 

"  In  the  midst  of  such  scenes  of  horror,  the  savage  Morgan 
fell  in  love.     His  character  was  not  likely  to  inspire  the  object 


42  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

of  his  attachment  with  favourable  sentiments  towards  him  :  he 
was  resolved,  therefore  to  subdue  by  force  the  beautiful  Span- 
iard that  inflamed  and  tormented  him — "  Stop,"  cried  she  to 
this  savage,  as  she  sprung  with  eagerness  from  his  arms,  "  stop  : 
thinkest  thou  then  that  thou  canst  ravish  my  honour  from  me, 
as  thou  hast  wrested  from  me  my  fortune  and  my  liberty  ?  Be 
assured  that  I  can  die  and  be  revenged."  Having  said  this, 
she  drew  out  a  poignard  from  under  hf^r  gown,  which  she  would 
have  plunged  into  his  heart  had  he  not  avoided  the  blow. 

"  But  Morgan,  still  inflamed  with  a  passion,  which  this  deter- 
mined resistance  had  turned  into  ragf^,  instead  of  the  tenderness 
and  attention  be  had  made  use  of  to  prevail  upon  his  captive, 
now  proceeded  to  treat  her  with  the  greatest  inhnmanily.  The 
fair  Spaniard  immoveably  resolute,  stimulated  at  the  same  time 
that  she  resisted  the  frantic  desires  of  Morgan  ;  till  at  last  the 
pirates  expressing  their  resentment  at  being  kept  so  long  in  a 
state  of  inactivity  by  a  caprice  which  appeared  extravagant  to 
them,  he  was  under  the  necessity  of  listening  to  their  complaint* 
and  giving  up  his  pursuit.  Panama  was  burnt.  They  then  set 
sail  with  a  great  number  of  prisoners,  who  were  ransomed  a  few 
days  after,  and  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Chagre  with  a  pro- 
digious booty. 

"  Before  the  break  of  the  day  that  had  been  fixed  upon  for  the 
division  of  the  spoil,  Morgan,- while  the  rest  of  the  pirates  were 
in  a  deep  sleep,  with  the  principal  freebooters  of  his  own  coun- 
try, sailed  for  Jamaica,  in  a  vessel  which  he  had  laden  with  the 
rich  spoils  of  a  city  that  served  as  the  staple  of  commerce 
between  the  old  and  the  new  world.  This  instance  of  treachery, 
unheard  of  before,  excited  a  rage  and  resentment  not  to  be  de- 
i^cribed.  The  English  pursued  the  robber  in  hopes  of  wresting 
from  him  the  booty  of  which  their  right  and  their  avidity  had 
been  frustrated.  The  French,  though  sharers  in  the  same  loss, 
retired  to  the  island  of  Tortuga.*'* 

After  this  period,  the  character  of  Morgan  seems  to  have 
considerably  improved  :  unless,  as  Mr.  Edwards  believes,  he  was 

"  AbbdRavnal. 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  MORGAN's  CHARACTER.  43 

before  greatly  traduced.*  The  Spanish  writers  no  doubt,  in 
the  language  of  exaggeration,  represent  him  as  a  most  inhuman 
monster  ;  but  the  probability  is,  that  after  he  disengaged  him- 
self from  the  society  with  which  he  bad  hitherto  acted,  better 
sentiments  and  feelings  gradually  took  possession  of  his  breast, 
till  he  became  worthy  of  the  recommendation  of  the  earl  of 
Carlisle  as  his  successor  in  the  government  of  Jamaica,  where 
he  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  in  the  absence  of  the 
earl.  He  had  previously  puichased  a  plantation  in  the  island, 
which  he  cultivated  with  great  industry.  The  duties  of  his 
new  station  were  discharged  with  the  utmost  zeal  and  fidelity  ; 
Chailes  the  Second  conferred  the  honour  of  knighthood  upon 
him  J  and  Mr  Edwards  states,  that  "  by  the  kindness  of  a  friend 
in  Jamaica,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  perusing  some  of  Sir 
Henry  Morgan's  original  private  letters,  and  "  this  "  he  adds, 
"  1  will  say,  thai  they  manifest  such  a  spirit  of  humanity,  justice, 
liberality,  and  piety,  as  prove  that  he  has  either  been  grossly 
traduced,  or  that  he  was  the  greatest  hypocrite  living; — a  cha- 
racter ill-suited  to  the  ftank  and  fearless  temper  of  the  man. 

The  French  colony  first  attracted  the  attention  of  the  mother 
country  in  1665,  at  which  period,  though  the  adventurers  were 
numerous,  the  regular  planters  who  were  properly  speaking,  the 
only  colonists,  were  extremely  few,  amounting  it  is  said,  to  not 
more  than  four  hundred.  The  multiplication  of  these  settlers, 
was  perceived  by  the  government  to  be  an  object  of  the  first 
importance,  and  the  difiicult  undertaking  was  very  wisely  confided 
to  a  gentleman  of  Anjou,  named  Bertrand  D'Ogeron,  who  was 
endowed  with  all  those  personal  qualities  and  comprehensive 
views  which  fitted  him  for  the  post  to  which  he  was  appointed. 

At  the  period  of  his  fiist  emigration  to  America,  in  1656,  he 
had  served  fifteen  years  as  captain  in  the  marines :  but  as  the 
best  concerted  plans  do  not  always  prosper,  he  was  first  deceiv- 
ed, and  finally  shipwrecked,  with  the  loss  of  the  principal  part  of 
the  merchandize  and  provisions;  which  calamity  reduced  him 
to  the  necessity  of  living,  during  a  very  considerable  period 

*  Hiitorical  Survey  of  the  French  Colonies  in  St.  Doraingo,--4to  p.  128,  note. 


44  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

with  the  buccaneers,  who  did  not  fall  to 'cherish  for  him  the 
highest  respect.  His  misfortunes  continued  to  multiply  ;  for  on 
his  leaving  France,  he  had  directed  his  correspondents  to  send 
their  communications  and  merchandize  to  Martinique,  whither 
he  repaired  in  vain  to  receive  them.  D'Ogeron  was  under  the 
neces^ity  of  proceeding  to  France,  where  having  collected  all 
his  property  together,  he  embarked  in  a  vessel  which  he  had 
equipped  and  laden  :  but  unfortunately  confiding  the  disposal 
of  the  cargo  to  a  faithless  servant  at  Jainaica,  he  had  to  sustain 
the  entire  loss.  These  and  other  calamities  however,  though 
they  cteated  great  embarrassment,  did  not  produce  desponden- 
cy ;  on  the  contrary,  his  fortitude  in  supporting,  and  his  skill  in 
extricating  himsslf  from  diflicullies,  acquired  bin)  the  highest  re- 
putation in  St.  Domingo  and  Tortuga,  and  induced  the  govern- 
ment to  .  ive  him  the  superintendence  of  the  colony. 

This  situation  was  obviously  critical  :  he  had  to  establish  the 
authoriiy  of  government  aujongst  a  lawless  and  irregular  tribe  of 
men,  whose  wandering  and  piratical  habits  rendered  them  pe- 
culiarly unprepared  to  submit  to  the  restraint  of  laws  Habitu- 
ated to  crimes,  they  were  not  easily  to  be  iii-piied  with  humane 
sentiments — accustomed  to  idleness,  they  were  not  readily  to  be 
brought  to  industrious  and  laborious  occupations — and  trading 
freely  with  all  nations,  they  couW  not,  without  the  utmost  care 
and  prudence,  be  led  to  respect  the  privileges  of  an  exclusive 
company,  v\hich  had  been  formed  in  1664,  to  include  all  the 
French  settlements. 

The  intercourse  which  he  had  previously  maintained  with  his 
new  subjects,  enabled  him  to  perceive  their  peculiarities  of 
character,  of  which  knowledge  he  availed  himself  with  great  sa- 
gacity. It  was  of  importance  to  detain  the  freebooters  who 
were  resolved  to  go  in  search  of  new  and  more  advantageous 
settlements,  by  remitting  the  share  of  the  booty  to  which  he  was 
entitled,  and  by  procuring  commissions  from  Portugal  for  attack- 
ing the  Spaniards  even  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  with 
France  :  by  which  means,  he  secured  their  friendship  instead  of 
exposing  himself  to  the  danger  of  encountering  their  hostility. 
To  the  buccaneers  or  huntsmen  he  advanced  money,  or  pro- 


WOMEN    SENT    TO    THE    ISLAND.  45 

cured  it  without  interest,  to  enable  tbem  to  erect  habitations ; 
and  to  the  planters  he  conceded  every  possible  privilege  and 
encouragement. 

There  was  another  advantage  which  he  seized  with  judg- 
ment, and  procuied  with  promptitude.  It  was  of  material  con- 
sequence to  maintain  and  increase  the  population,  by  a  measure 
which  would  diffusa  present  comf  ,rt  and  secure  future  stability 
to  the  settlement.  In  vain  could  he  expect  internal  prosperity, 
unless  he  inspired  a  relish  for  domestic  habits,  wliich  became 
therefore  an  object  of  most  solicitous  attention.  Fifty  young 
women  were  sent  from  France,  and  afterwards  an  equal  number 
to  supply  the  colonists  with  wives,  but  they  were  disposed  of 
without  any  regard  to  the  choice  which  affection  might  be  in- 
duced to  make,  and  with  a  chief  view  to  polilical  expediency. 
A  certain  sum  was  required  to  be  paid  for  them,  which,  while 
it  tended  to  encourage  industry  in  order  to  procure  the  requisite 
deposit,  must  have  reduced  the  character  of  marriage  to  a  de- 
grading merchandize.  This  was  however  found  to  be  the  only 
means  of  preventing  quarrels  and  bloodshed  ;  but  it  opened 
the  way  for  an  importation  of  females,  of  a  uiore  unworthy 
cast,  who  were  engaged  to  their  new  masters  for  a  period  of 
three  years  :*  but  this  allowance  proved  inexpressibly  prejudi- 
cial to  the  interests  of  the  colony  :  it  had  the  effect  of  driving 
from  the  island  many  brave  youths  who  might  otherwise  have 
been  its  ornament  and  defence,  but  who  found  it  impossible  to 
live  in  comfort  amidst  universal  profligacy.     Notwithstanding 

•  The  declaration  which  each  of  the  tiuccaiieers  was  accustomed  to  make  to 
the  woman  that  fell  to  his  share,  was  in  the  loUowing  terms  :  — "  I  take  thee  with- 
out knowing,  or  caring  to  know,  who  thou  art  If  any  body  from  whence  thoti 
comest  would  have  had  thee,  thou  wouldst  not  Lave  come  iu  quest  of  me  ;  but  no 
ra  itter.  I  do  not  desire  thee  to  give  me  an  account  of  thy  past  conduct,  because 
Ihave  no  right  to  be  offended  at  it.  at  the  time  whenthuu  wast  at  liberty  to  behave 
either  well  or  iil,  according  to  th\  own  pleasure ;  and  because  I  ^hnll  have  no 
reason  ;o  be  ashamed  of  any  thing  thou  wast  guilty  of  when  thou  didst  not  belong 
to  me.  Give  me  only  thy  vvor.i  for  the  future,  I  acquit  thee  of  what  is  past." 
Then  striking  his  hand  on  the  barrel  of  his  gun,  he  added,  •'  This  will  revenge 
me  of  thy  breach  of  faith  3  if  thou  shouldst  prove  false,  this  will  certainly  be  true 
tomyaitp." 


46  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

this  error,  the  number  of  planters  were  increased  by  the  man- 
agement of  D'Ogeron,  from  four  hundred  to  the  number  of 
fifteen  hundred,  in  four  years. 

Although  this  judicious  governor  had  only  prevailed  upon 
the  inhabitants  to  submit  to  his  government  at  first  by  the 
promise  of  opening  all  the  ports  to  foreign  commerce,  yet  he 
had  succeeded  hy  degrees  in  establishing  the  exclusive  privilege 
of  the  India  company,  which  at  length  secured  the  entire  trade; 
but  they  were  so  elated  with  success  as  to  venture  to  raise  the 
price  of  their  goods  two-thirds,  which  produced  an  immediate 
and  dangerous  insurrection.  Accustomed  to  deeds  of  violence, 
they  had  no  difiicully  in  taking  up  arms  and  were  at  length  only 
conciliated  upon  the  promise  that  all  French  ships  should  be 
free  to  trade  with  them,  paying  five  per  cent,  to  the  company 
on  their  arrival  and  departure.  Having  effected  this  accommo> 
dation,  the  governor  generously  procured  two  ships,  apparently 
for  his  own  use  ;  but  really  intended  for  the  benefit  of  the  colony. 
Their  destination  was  to  convey  the  crops  into  Europe,  and 
every  one  shipped  his  own  commodities  at  a  moderate  freight. 
On  their  return,  the  cargo  was  exposed  to  public  sale  for  prime 
cost ;  and  in  addition  to  this,  no  interest  was  taken  for  the  long- 
est credit,  and  even  no  security  was  required.  This  was  a  pro- 
ceeding founded  in  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  human 
heart,  and  highly  calculated  to  inspire  the  loftiest  sentiments  of 
gratitude  and  affection. 

M.  D'Ogeron  had  for  a  long  time  meditated  the  conquest  of 
the  whole  island  for  France,  and  even  pledged  his  life  to  the 
ministry  at  Versailles  for  the  success  of  his  enterprize,  provided 
they  would  send  him  a  squadron  sufficiently  powerful  to  blockade 
the  harbour  of  the  capital.  In  the  year  1675,  he  went  into 
France  for  the  express  purpose  of  urging  this  design  upon  the 
consideration  of  the  court.  His  representations,  however,  did 
not  produce  all  the  effect  which  his  ardent  mind  had  anticipa- 
ted ;  it  v.;as  considered  as  an  impracticable  undertaking,  while 
the  danger  to  which  the  colony  was  exposed  by  the  perpetual 
hostilities  of  their  neighbours  was  overlooked.  The  Spaniards, 
however,  were  usually  foiled ;  but  the  spirit  of  retaliation  and 


DEATH    OF    M.    d'oGERON.  47 

plunder,  checked  the  progress  of  agriculture  and  indisposed 
the  people  for  regular  labour.  Under  the  direction  of  so  saga- 
cious a  mind  as  that  which  distinguished  the  projection  of  this 
conquest,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  its  achievement  was 
at  least  highly  probable,  and  would  have  prevented  many  cala- 
mities which  the  French  afterwards  suffered. 

When  at  Paris,  M.  D'Ogeron  was  seized  with  a  flux,  which 
terminated  his  career  there,  at  the  close  of  this  year  or  at  the 
commencement  of  1676,  without  having  seen  either  the  king  or 
ministry  ;  it  is  honourable  to  his  character,  that  notwithstanding 
the  opportuniiies  which  he  had  of  accumulating  riches,  he  died 
poor  ;  but  left  behind  him,  virtues  not  unrecorded  in  the  hearts 
of  the  colonists,  or  in  the  memory  of  an  admiring  posterity. 

Difficult  as  the  virtues  of  the  last  governor  had  rendered  it 
to  succeed  him,  the  post  was  occupied  with  considerable  ho- 
nour to  himself  by  M.  de  PoUancey,  who,  to  his  personal  quali- 
fications united  the  claim  of  relationship,  being  the  nephew  of 
M.  D'Ogeron.  Although  somewhat  more  haughty  than  his 
predecessor,  he  possessed  a  similar  power  of  attracting  the 
universal  affection  and  confidence  of  those  by  whom  he  was 
immediately  surrounded,  or  over  whom  he  had  to  exerise  au- 
thority. Instead  of  adopting  new  and  speculative  plans  of  ad- 
ministration, the  whole  of  his  proceedings  were  designed  to 
consolidate  and  complete  the  judicious  system  which  had  been 
previously  arranged.  His  views,  however,  were  considerably  limit- 
ed, perhaps  by  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed  ;  for 
he  seems  only  to  have  contemplated  the  preservation  of  the 
colony  in  its  present  state  of  prosperity,  not  to  have  thought  of 
extending  it.  As  the  peninsula  of  Samana  was  much  exposed  to 
the  incursions  of  the  Spaniards,  he  ordered  the  removal  of  the  in- 
habitants to  the  plain  of  Cape  Francois,  who  reluctantly  obey- 
ed. This  new  residence  he  took  care  to  fortify  ;  and  it  was 
ever  after  regarded  with  jealousy  by  the  rival  nation.  At  the 
beginning  of  1 678,  M.  Puiiancey  received  advice  of  an  intention 
having  been  formed  to  attack  it,  which  he  prevented  by  timely 
and  well  concerted  movement. 

In  1679,  a  revolt  of  the  Negroes  which  took  place  at  Port  de 


48  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

Palx.  occasioned  the  governor  considerable  trouble.  The  cir- 
cumstances were,  in  brief,  as  follow :  a  black  slave  called  Padre- 
jan,  having  killed  the  Spanish  master  in  whose  s<^rvice  he  bad 
been  for  many  years,  fled  for  refuge  to  Tortuga,  where  he  was 
allowed  to  be  at  liberty  ;  and  going  afterwards  into  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  St.  Domingo,  he  there  cultivated  a  piece  of  land 
now  called  St.  Louis,  opposite  the  eastern  point  of  Tortuga. 
Slill  bent  upon  wickedness,  Padrejan  seduced  some  of  the  slaves, 
to  whom  he  proposed  to  massacre  all  the  French  inhabitants, 
hoping  that  such  an  action  would  sufficiently  recommend  him 
to  the  Spaniards,  from  whom  his  crimes  had  previously  driven 
him  away.  There  were  at  this  period,  but  few  Negroes  in  the 
colony  ;  and  most  of  them  had  been  originally  among  the  Span- 
iards, to  whom  they  felt  some  inclination  to  return.  Padrejan 
consequently  found  little  difficulty  in  arranging  his  plan  ;  and 
having  speedily  assembled  his  partizans  together,  overran  the 
country  as  far  as  Port  Margol,  pillaging  and  massacreing  in 
every  direction.  At  length  he  posted  himself  on  a  lofty  moun- 
tain, between  St.  Anne  and  St.  Louis,  entrenching  himself  with 
trees;  and  from  this  fortress  made  perpetual  and  desolating  ex- 
cursions in  the  neighbourhood,  destroying  all  the  Frenchmen 
he  could  find,  and  releasing  the  Negroes  from  their  servitude. 

Poiiancey,  who  was  at  Port  de  Paix,  felt  himself  prodigious- 
ly embarrassed  by  these  hostile  proceedings,  for  not  only  did  he 
feel  reluctant  to  expose  his  troops  to  these  infuriated  revolters 
who  were  in  possession  of  an  almost  inaccessible  post ;  it  was 
even  doubtful  whether  he  had  sufficient  force  to  subdue  them, 
should  he  resolve  upon  the  hazardous  experiment.  In  addition 
to  this,  he  perceived  an  universal  reluctance  among  his  people 
to  engage  in  the  enteiprizs',  although  the  evil  daily  and  hourly 
increased.  At  this  critical  juncture,  a  small  band  of  buccaneers 
came  into  the  Port  de  Paix,  to  whom  the  governor  proposed 
the  labour  of  terminating  the  revolt.  This  they  readily  ac- . 
cepted  ;  and  instantly  repairing  to  the  mountain,  they  climbed 
it  with  so  much  resolution,  and  attacked  the  fortress  with  such 
vigour, as  to  put  the  poor  Negroes  into  the  utmost  consternation, 
many  of  whom,  and  among  them  Padrejan,  they  killed,  dispers- 
ing the  rest. 


DEATH    OF    M.  DE    POUANCEY.  49 

Such  was  the  restlessness  under  oppression,  and  such  the  .in- 
dications of  the  lovp  of  liberty,  so  natural  to  the  human  bosom, 
which  from  time  to  time,  broke  forrti  in  this  much  injured 
island.  It  would  have  been  well  for  their  rulers,  had  they  duly 
considered  how  much  the  instigator  to  crimes,  who  becomes 
such  no  less  by  a  severity  of  condu't  that  occasions  them,  than 
by  direct  encouragement  and  dictation,  is  himself  a  participator 
in  their  guilt,  and  answerable  for  their  consequences.  However 
we  must  condemn  wickedness  wlierever  practised,  and  under 
whatever  circumstances  of  temptation  we  cannot  but  pity  those 
wretched  people,  who  in  seeking  dt-livt  ranee  from  unmerited 
degradation,  were  treatetl  as  rebels  and  miscreants. 

In  163!,  Puiiancey  went  into  Fiance,  whence  he  returned  in 
the  spring  of  the  following  year,  and  about  the  close  of  it,  died, 
much  and  deservedly  regretted  by  all  who  knew  him.  With 
regard  to  the  colony,  notwithstanding  all  his  care,  zeal,  and 
persevering  attention  to  its  interests,  he  left  it  in  a  very  deplora- 
ble condition.  The  buccaneers  were  almost  reduced  to  nothing, 
while  the  other  classes  of  the  population  were  infected  with  an 
untractable  spirit,  owing  to  their  dissatisfaction  with  certain 
commercial  regulations  respecting  the  cultivation  of  tobacco, 
by  which  they  considered  themselves  aggrieved.  The  piratical 
freebooters  were  of  little  service  in  opposing  the  enemies  of 
the  colony,  though  they  spread  universal  terror  through  the  Indies 
by  their  depredations;  and  on  the  other  hand,  they  prevented  the 
interchange  of  trade  by  the  alarms  their  conduct  spread  around, 
and  exposed  the  settlement  to  the  continual  retaliations  of  ex- 
asperated foes.     At  the  same  time,  they  scarcely  acknowledged 

'  the  government,  and  submitted  but  imperfectly,  and  with  a  very- 
ill  grace  to  its  regulations.  Besides  these  evils,  the  Spaniards 
refused  to  allow  the  right  of  the  French  to  form  any  establish- 
ment on  the  island  of  St.  Domingo,  where  they  not  only  regard- 

j  ed  them  as  intruders  and  rubbers,  but  as  the  encouragers  of 
rebellion  and  piracy.  It  was  their  anxious  witjh  to  confine  them 
toTortuga;  whde  the  English  who  were  settled  in  Jamaica, 
carried  their  views  still  further,  by  wishing  totally  to  expel  thera 
from  the  West  Indies. 

8 


w^ 


50  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

It  was  not  till  16S3,  that  de  Cussy  was  appointed  as  successor 
to  M,  de  Poiiancey — De  Franquesnay  having  commanded  in  the 
mean  time  as  the  king's  lieutenant;  and  upon  his  arrival,  the 
new  governor  found  enough  to  do  in  order  to  tranquillize  the 
mutinous  dispositions  of  his  people.  The  freebooters  had  spread 
disord<-r  in  every  direction,  and  the  colony  was  throughout  in 
a  very  depraved  stale,  neither  religion  nor  justice  being  admin- 
istered. Two  commissioners  were  therefore  sent  in  16S4,  to 
concert  measures  with  De  Cussy,  for  the  better  regulation  of  the 
internal  policy,  and  the  chevalier  St.  Laurence  and  M.  Bf  gon 
who  were  deputed  to  this  important  work,  executed  it  with 
judgment  and  fidelity.  Courts  of  Judicature  were  established 
f  u  the  several  districts,  responsible  to  a  supreme  council  at 
Petit  Goave.  Other  points  were  adjusted  by  means  of  a  little 
address,  without  any  serious  disagreement.  Negociations  were 
entered  into  with  the  government  at  home,  in  order  to  obtain 
relief  from  the  restrictions  which  had  been  imposed  upon  com- 
merce, pailicularly  in  the  article  of  tobacco,  but  they  proved 
unavailable,  although  at  several  subsequent  periods  the  colony 
was  on  the  point  of  destruction  tbiough  the  failure  of  trade, 
and  tbe  despondency  of  the  inhabitants;  till  at  length  the 
manufactuiH  uf  indigo  became  considerable  and  enriched  a  num- 
ber of  individuals. 

When  M.  de  Poiiapcey  first  took  possession  of  his  govern- 
ment, the  isle  of  Turtuga  was  alujost  abandoned  by  the  in- 
habitants, and  he  had  taken  much  but  fruitless  pains  to  re-peo- 
ple it.  De  Cussy  cherished  a  similar  solicitude  on  the  subject, 
at  least,  at  first,  till  finding  that  it  was  far  less  productive  than  it 
bad  formerly  been,  he  remitted  his  exertions,  and  at  length  it 
became  entirely  deserted.  This  tended  to  improve  Port  de- 
Paix,  which  during  the  whole  of  this  administration  was  always 
regarded  as  tbe  most  important  part  of  the  colony  ;  and  one 
of  the  first  concerns  of  this  government  was  to  erect  a  fort, 
which  the  desertion  of  Tortuga  rendered  absolutely  requisite 
for  the  protection  of  tbe  channel  running  between  the  two 
islands :  but  it  was  not  found  possible  to  put  this  design  int© 
very  speedy  execution. 


MERCHANTS    OF    ST.  MALO.  51 

The  court  having  entertained  very  serious  designs  of  attempt- 
ing the  conquest  of  St.  Domingo,  M.  de  Cu&sy  was  in- 
structed secretly  to  niake  preparations  for  this  achievement;* 
while  at  the  same  moment  (1688)  the  Spaniards  were  engaging 
in  perpetual  incursions  up  ,«n  the  French  boundaries,  and  medi- 
tating on  their  part  the  capture  of  Cayenne,  St.  Croix,  and 
finally,  the  French  portion  of  St.  Domingo.  De  Cussy,  how- 
ever, was  disconcerted  by  other  occurrences.  The  king  had 
granted  an  exclusive  privilege  of  trade  with  the  Spaniards  in 
these  seas  to  a  cinnpany  of  merchants  of  St.  Malo,  which  had 
the  effect  of  depriving  some  hundreds  of  the  inhabitants  of  their 
ordinary  subsistence  ;  the  tobacco  did  not  sell,  and  the  people 
who  could  not  engage  in  the  indigo  manufactures,  found 
themselves  in  circumstances  of  great  distress  ;  in  consequence 
of  which,  discontent  rapidly  extended,  till  it  issued  in  an  open 
revolt  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Cape  Francois.  Measures, 
however,  were  instantly  taken  by  M.  de  Franquesnay,  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  district,  in  concert  with  M.  de 
Cussy,  at  once  conciliatory  and  firm,  which  issued  in  the  total 
suppression  of  the  tumult. 

In  the  summer  of  1689,  De  Cussy  planned  an  expedition 
against  St.  Jago,  of  which  he  was  determined,  if  possible,  to 
dispossess  the  Spaniards.  With  this  view,  he  assembled  a  force, 
consisting  of  four  hundred  cavalry  and  four  hundred  and  fifty 
infantry  ;  one  hundred  and  fifty  negroes,  were  employed  as  at- 
tendants on  the  detachment.  Having  reached  the  neighbour- 
hood, and  in  vain  summoned  them  to  surrender,  he  vigorously 
pursued  his  project.  On  the  sixth  of  July,  he  passed  the  river 
Yaqu^,  without  opposition,  and  proceeded  to  a  defile  within 
half  a  league  of  the  town,  where  two  men  could  scarcely  pass 
abreast.     Instead  of  waiting  for  an  attack,  he  continued  to  ad- 

*  How  anxiously  this  was  desired,  may  be  conceived  from  some  expressions 
to  De  Cussy,  in  a  letter  from  the  minister,  dated  January  13,  1689,  "  vous  pouvez 
croire  que  vous  n'aurtz  de  votre  vie  rien  de  plus  grand  a  executer  et  vous  pouvez 
compter,  en  reussissant,  sur  des  graces  particulieres  de  sa  majestS,  surtout  qu'elle 
vous  en  dunneroit  le  gouvernement  Je  vous  pris  de  m'iuformer  des  mesure.s  qu* 
vous  prendrez  pour  I'execulion  de  ce  project." 


m 


52 


HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 


vance,  and  the  van  proceeded  without  resistance,  leaving  the 
centre  and  rear  open  to  an  attack,  which  they  did  nut  sufficient- 
ly anticipate  from  the  enemy,  who  being  posted  on  the  high 
ground  above,  possessed  every  a«Jvantage.  The  promptitude 
and  skill  of  the  general  however  soon  releasi^d  bis  troops  from 
this  dilemma,  and  he  obtained  a  decisive  victory,  when  he  drove 
the  enemy  to  the  hills  and  took  immediate  possession  of  the 
place.  It  was  absolutely  deserted — the  churches  all  open,  and 
the  houses  stripped  of  their  furniture  :  but  a  quantity  of  meat 
and  diink  re  nained  behind,  which,  notwithstanding  an  order 
issued  to  the  contrary,  some  of  the  party  ventured,  to  their 
great  detriment,  to  partake.  This  excited  a  siispicion  of  the 
food  having  been  poisoned,  which  so  enraged  them  that  an 
universal  request  was  presented  for  permission  to  set  fire  to  the 
town  ;  whicb  was  granted,  upon  the  condition  of  sparing  the 
churches  and  chapels.  As  the  clouds  seemed  to  portend  rain, 
and  the  rivers  were  liable  at  those  times  to  swell  to  such  a 
height  as  to  render  a  passage  difficult,  it  was  determined  to  make 
a  timely  retreat,  satisfied  with  the  wound  that  had  been  inflict- 
ed upon  their  Spanish  rivals.  Accordingly  in  a  few  days  the  ex- 
pedition returned  with  little  molestation.  At  the  same  juncture, 
the  intelligence  of  the  English  having  taken  St.  Christopher's, 
reached  the  island,  and  prevented  any  further  military  attempt 
at  present.  The  fugitives  from  the  captured  island,  were  distri- 
buted in  Martinique  and  St.  Domingo. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Spaniards  prepared  to  revenge  their  dis- 
grace at  St.  Jago,  by  an  attack  upon  Cape  Fran(;ois  :  to  which 
place  De  Cussy  repaired  on  the  tenth  of  January.  1690,  and  set 
about  the  necessary  means  of  defence,  contrary  to  his  own  opin- 
ion, but  at  the  earnest  representation  of  Franquesnay,  he  issued 
orders  to  meet  the  enemy  in  the  plains  at  a  distance  of  about  a 
league  and  a  halffrom  the  town.  This  arrangement  was  fatal — the 
French  were  outnumbered  by  treble  their  own  force  ;  and  De  Cus- 
sy, with  thirty  officers  and  four  or  five  hundred  of  the  bravest  men, 
amongvvhom  was  Franquesnay,  perished  on  the  field  where  the 
Spaniards  triumphed.  Nor  did  the  conquerors  fail  to  retaliate 
upon  the  surrounding  country  the  injuries  they  had  previously 


ARRIVAL   OF   DUCASSE.  53 

sustained  :  neither  man,  woman,  child,  nor  habitation,  withia 
their  reach,  escaping  their  vengeance.  Many  indeed  fled  to 
the  woods,  and  succeeded  in  saving  their  fatnilies,  property,  and 
negroes;  among  the  latter  some  remarkable  instances  occurred 
of  that  fidelity,  which  has  been  always  characteristic  of  these 
poor  oppressed  people,  who  refused  to  avail  themselves  of  the 
present  favourable  opportunity  of  resuming  their  liberty  and 
sacrificing  their  oppressors.  After  committing  various  depreda- 
tions, the  Spaniards  withdrew. 

The  only  proper  person  that  could  be  found  to  succeed  to 
the  superintendence  of  the  colony,  was  M.  Ducasse,  who  was  in- 
timately acquainted  with  the  island.  He  was  a  native  of  Beam, 
and  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Senegal  Company,  to  which 
he  rendered  very  important  services.  Upon  his  arrival  at  Cape 
Franqois,  in  October,  1691,  he  found  the  colony  in  a  reduced 
and  wretched  condition,  the  population  diminished,  the  fortifi- 
cations in  almost  luin,  and  the  shores  menaced  by  a  formidable 
Spanish  fleet.  This  obliged  him  to  hasten  to  Leogane  and  Pe- 
tit Goave  with  the  ships  that  had  accompanied  him  from  France. 
The  measures  of  a  defensive  and  precautionary  description 
which  he  took,  effectually  prevented  the  enemy  from  making 
any  descent :  they  were  in  fact  sufficiently  alarmed  at  his  pre- 
parations. 

Ducasse  had  to  encounter  another  danger  in  the  untractable 
spirit  of  the  freebooters.  After  the  Spaniards  had  retired,  five 
or  six  of  their  vessels  put  to  sea;  the  measures  of  the  governor, 
in  which  were  blended  firmness  and  moderation,  not  proving 
agreeable  to  their  taste  :  the  mischief  was  the  greater,  owing  to 
the  influence  of  their  conduct  upon  the  younger  inhabitants  who 
partook  of  their  dissatisfaction,  and  were  solicitous  of  enjoying 
their  liberty  ;  so  that  to  correct  this  roving  spirit,  and  to  con- 
vert them  into  useful  subjects,  required  all  the  address  and 
management  of  which  the  governor  was  possessed. 

The  English  and  Spaniards  who  continued,  from  time  to  time 
to  menace  the  island,  were  frequently  enabled  to  ascertain 
its  state,  by  intercepting  several  of  the  governor's  letters.'  In 
1693,  however,  this  was  retaliated  upon  the  archbishop  of  St, 


54  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

Domingo,  and  it  was  found  by  communication  to  the  president 
of  the  council  for  India,  that  he  entertained  the  greatest  appre- 
hensions lest  the  French  should  obtain  the  mastery  of  the  whole 
island,  which  he  had  not  at  present  sufficient  means  to  prevent. 
Ducasse  instantly  addressed  his  court,  urging  them  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  present  apprehensions  and  unprepared  stale  of 
the  Spanish  settlement,  and  achieve  the  easy  conquest  which 
now  awaited  them.  These  representations,  from  whatever 
cause,  failed. 

In  1694,  Ducasse  made  a  descent  upon  the  island  of  Jamaica, 
where  having  done  considerable  mischief  to  the  English  towns, 
he  reimbarked  with  the  gain  of  three  thousand  negroes,  besides 
a  quantity  of  indigo  and  other  valuable  articles  of  merchandize. 
The  former  were  considered  as  an  important  acquisition,  as  the 
greatest  attention  had  long  been  paid  to  the  cultivation  of  the 
sugar  cane.  The  English,  as  was  to  be  anticipated,  soon  resolv- 
ed upon  returning  the  compliment,  and  m  the  sum[))er  of  1695, 
pi'epared  to  visit  St.  Domingo  in  conjunction  with  their  Spanish 
allies.  Having  entered  with  a  considerable  fleet  into  the  bay  of 
Mancenille,  after  some  days,  partly  through  the  mismanagement, 
and  partly  through  the  cowardice  of  their  opponents,  they  suc- 
ceeded in  penetrating  the  settlement  of  Cape  Fran9ois,  which 
they  plundered  and  reduced  to  ashes.  Hence  they  pushed  on 
in  two  divisions  towards  Port  de  Paix,  and  very  soon  took 
possession  of  the  heights  which  commanded  the  fort,  and  placed 
the  town  in  a  state  of  seige.  It  was  not  long  before  the  discon- 
tents that  prevailed  in  consequence  of  being  exposed  to  all  the 
miseries  connected  with  such  a  situation,  obliged  the  commander 
to  abandon  it  to  the  victorious  enemy,  who  made  many  priso- 
ners. It  seemed  at  first  mysterious,  that  after  this  they  should 
not  persevere  in  further  spreading  devastation  through  the  dis- 
pirited colony,  but  the  probability  is.  that  the  information  they 
received  of  formidable  preparations  for  resistance  at  Leogane, 
and  the  neighbouring  places,  deterred  them.  They  had  be- 
sides fully  revenged  the  injuries  they  had  sustained  in  the  preced- 
ing year. 

In  addition  to  these  evils,  the  king  sent  out  express  orders  to 


AFFAIR    OF  CARTHAGENA.  65 

transport  the  colony  of  St.  Croix  to  St.  Domingo,  which  in  other 
circumstances  might  have  been  regarded  as  a  reinforcement  of 
its  strength  and  population,  but  at  this  moment  neither  th-s  one 
nor  the  other  were  well  able  to  subsist  alone :  the  inevitable 
consequence  was,  that  that  which  ought  to  have  proved  an  assis- 
tance, became  a  very  serious  burden. 

The  succeeding  years  present  no  very  interesting  details  to 
the  historian.  Similar  hostilities  to  those  which  had  been 
already  manifested  between  the  rival  nations  continued  to  prevail, 
but  with  no  very  consiqierable  effect  on  either  side.  The  taking 
of  Carthagena,  one  of  the  richest  towns  and  strongest  fortresses 
of  the  Indies,  ma)  however,  be  considered  as  an  event  of  some 
magnitude.  It  was  achieved  under  the  sanction  of  the  govern- 
ment, who  authorised  a  few  individuals  in  1697,  to  fit  out  seven 
ships  of  the  line  and  other  vessels  of  inferior  size,  under  the 
command  of  Commodore  Pointis.  The  buccaneers  joined  the 
expedition  in  which  Ducasse  also  participated  :  but  these  two 
commanders,  neither  before  nor  after  the  enterpiiseseem  to  have 
maintained  a  very  good  understanding  with  each  other.  The 
attempt  completely  succeeded — the  place  was  taken  and  treated 
with  terrible  severity.  Pointis  violated  every  article  of  the 
capitulation,  indulging  his  officers  and  soldiers  in  their  appetite 
for  plunder.  The  commodore  insisted  that  the  value  of  the 
spoils  did  not  exceed  seven  or  eigbt  millions  of  livres,  or  from 
two  hundred  and  ninety-one  thou:^and  six  hundred  and  sixty-six 
pounds  thirteen  shillings  and  four  pence  to  three  hundred  and 
thirty- three  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  pounds  six 
shillings  and  eight  pence.  Decasse  estimated  them  at  thirty  mil- 
lions, or  one  million  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds;  and 
others  at  forty  millions,  or  one  million  six  hundred  and  sixty-six 
thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty-six  pounds  ten  shillings  and 
four  pence.  The  buccaneers  were  by  agreement  to  receive 
one  quarter  of  the  whole  booty,  but  the  real  profit  dealt  out  to 
them  did  not  exceed  forty  thousand  crowns,  or  five  thousand 
pounds.  This  act  of  injustice  so  exasperated  these  adventurers, 
that  they  instantly  resolved  to  board  the  vessel  which  contained 
Pointis,  and  wreak  their  vengeance  upon  his  devoted  head< 


56  HISTORY   OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

•The  Sceptre,  for  so  the  ship  was  called,  was  at  the  time  by  some 
means  so  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  as  to  be  beyond 
the  reach  of  any  assistance :  and  the  unhappy  commander 
would  unquestionably  have  been  sacrificed,  bul  for  the  excla- 
mation of  one  of  the  party  in  these  words,  "  Why  should  we 
attack  this  rascal  ?  he  has  carried  off  nothing  that  belongs  to  us, 
but  has  left  our  share  at  Carthagena,  whither  we  must  go  to  re- 
cover it  "  This  was  received  with  great  applause,  and  so  easily 
are  brutal  minds  affected  only  by  impulse,  induced  to  change 
their  purposes,  that  they  sailed  back  to  the  city  without  further 
consideration.  Here  they  shut  up  all  the  male  inhabitants  in  the 
church,  where  having  defended  themselves  in  an  elaborate 
speech  against  the  anticipated  accusations  of  those  whom  they 
had  treated  with  so  much  severity,  and  loaded  Pointis  with  the 
utmost  reproach,  they  demanded,  as  in  their  estimate,  a  mode- 
rate compensation  and  inducement  to  them  to  quit  the  city,  the 
sum  of  five  million  livres,  or  two  hundred  and  eight  thousand 
three  hundred  and  thirty-three  pounds  six  shillings  and  eight 
pence;  but  this  sum  could  by  no  means  be  produced;  so  that 
after  repeated  cruelties  and  extortions,  they  set  sail,  contenting 
themselves  as  much  as  possible  with  the  wealth  already  amassed. 
Falling  in,  on  their  return,  with  a  fltet  of  Dutch  and  Knglish 
ships,  several  of  their  small  vessels  were  taken  or  sunk,  the  re- 
mainder escaping  to  St.  Domingo. 

During  the  expedition  we  have  now  related,  the  colony  had 
been  left  in  charge  of  the  Count  du  Boissy,  who  appears  to  have 
fulfilled  his  trust  with  great  zeal  and  skill.  He  personally  in- 
spected the  principal  places,  and  put  every  thing  into  the  best 
possible  state  of  defence.  An  insurrection  of  the  negroes,  who 
were  ever  panting  for  liberty,  occurred,  which  he  prumptly  and 
effectually  suppressed  ;  and  afterwards  acted  with  great  bravery 
in  repelling  an  irruption  of  the  English.  The  fate  of  this  officer 
was  melancholy.  Having  never  enjoyed  an  interview  with 
Ducasse  since  his  ai rival  upon  the  island,  he  embarked  in  the 
month  of  September  at  Cape  Franqois  on  board  a  merchant 
vessel,  with  a  view  of  proceeding  to  Petit  Goave  ;  but  perceiv- 
ing six  ships  which  he  took  for  enemies,  he  endeavoured  to  es- 


PEACE    OF    RYSWICK.  67 

cape  to  land  in  a  boat,  accompanied  with  three  negroes  and  a 
soldier.  The  land  was  not  more  than  a  league  and  a  half  dis- 
tant, notwithstanding  which,  every  effort  to  gain  it  proved  inef- 
fectual, the  boat  was  forced  out  to  sea  by  the  current,  and  the 
unfortunate  crew  driven  about  for  nine  days  without  reaching 
any  shore,  at  the  end  of  which  period  they  were  cast  upon  Cuba, 
near  the  port  of  Barracoa.  Here  they  remained  five  days  with- 
out provisions  of  any  description,  and  at  length  perished. 

Hostilities  continued  to  prevail  as  before  between  the  rival 
nations,  and  with  increased  exasperation.  The  French  inhabi- 
tants were  at  length  so  wearied  out,  that  they  began  to  think  of 
removing  from  the  island,  and  the  governor  of  St.  Jago  had  al- 
ready sent  a  Spanish  detachment  of  considerable  force,  which 
had  penetrated  the  plain  of  Cape  Franqois,  when  intelligence  of 
the  peace  of  UyswiCK  in  1697  suspended  all  further  proceedings ; 
and  the  two  rival  settlements  instantly  sheathed  their  swords. 
By  this  treaty,  the  French  obtained  the  first  regular  cession  of 
the  western  part  of  St.  Domingo. 


9 


CHAP.  III. 

FROM  THE  YEAR  1697  TO  THE  YEAR  1789. 

Company  of  St.  Louis. — M.  Auger  succeeds  Ducasse  and  Deslandes. — 
Destruction  of  the  cocoa  frees  on  the  island. — Commotion  in  1722. — 
Increasing  prosperity  of  the  French  colony. — A  view  of  the  ecclesi- 
astical and  political  constitution  of  the  French  and  Spanish  divisions 
of  the  island  previous  to  the  year  1789. 

It  appears  from  the  line  of  demarcation,  traced  out  by  the 
arrangements  at  the  peace  of  Hyswick,  extending  in  a  obhque 
direction  from  Cape  Francois  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Cape 
l?osa  on  the  west,  and  intercepting  on  one  side  the  towns  of 
Isabella  and  Jago,  and  on  the  other  Petit  Goave  and  Port  Louis, 
that  a  large  part  of  the  colony  southward  remained  in  a  consi- 
derable degree  unoccupied,  the  settlement  of  which  was  justly 
considered  by  the  government,  as  an  object  of  importance.  In 
this  district,  there  were  not  more  than  a  hundred  inhabitants, 
who  all  lived  in  huts  and  were  in  a  state  of  extretne  wretched- 
ness. With  a  view  to  the  population  and  culture  of  this  coun- 
try, the  government  in  1698  granted  it  for  thirty  years  to  a 
company  which  assumed  the  name  of  St.  Louis.  The  condi- 
tions were,  that  they  should  clear  the  ground  and  carry  on  a 
contraband  trade  with  the  Spanish  continent :  they  were  all  in 
the  first  five  years,  to  settle  upon  the  lands  fifteen  hundred  virhite 
people,  and  two  thousand  five  hundred  negroes,  and  to  distri- 
bute portions  to  every  applicant  for  their  occupation.  The 
company,  however,  was  soon  ruined  by  the  avaricious  spirit  of 
its  agents ;  and  in  1726  remitted  all  its  rights  to  the  king,  who 
transferred  them  to  the  India  company. 

Ducasse  having  been  made  admiral  of  the  fleet  in  1703,  M. 
Auger  wlio  had  acquired  considerable  distinction  by  a  well-con- 
certed defence  of  Gaudaloupe,  of  which  he  was  governor,  was 
appointed  as  his  successor.     He  was  a  native  of  America,  and 


DISTRESSES    OF    THE    COLONY.  59 

his  previous  life  had  been  somewhat  adventurous,  having  in  his 
youth  passed  a  considerable  time  in  astate  of  slavery.  This  had 
softened  liisdisposition,  and  he  obtained  the  characterof  beingthe 
most  accomphshed  governor  the  Frt  nch  ever  had  upon  the  ii-land.* 
Soon  afterwards  it  was  found  expedient  to  separate  more  entire- 
ly than  had  hitherto  been  done,  the  civil  and  military  functions, 
as  the  power  vested  in  the  governors  was  so  extensive  and  dis- 
cretionary, that  it  presented  every  temptation  to  despoti'^m. 
M.  Deslandes  was  accordingly  placed  in  the  situation  of  com- 
missary and  intendant  :  but  neither  he  nor  his  colleague  the 
governor,  with  whom  he  lived  in  the  utmost  harmony,  long  sur- 
vived their  appointmenf  :  the  former  died  in  October  1705, 
and  the  latter  in  the  following  February.  Others  followed 
them  in  rapid  succession,  of  whom  nothing  remarkable  is  re- 
corded. 

From  the  time  of  M.  D'Ogeron,  who  planted  the  first  cocoa 
tree  in  665,  a  considerable  source  of  revenue  and  wealth  had 
originated.  The  plantations  increased  in  every  direction,  parti- 
cularly in  the  narrow  vallies  to  the  westward,  where  upon  some 
grounds  there  were  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand  trees  ;  but 
in  1715  and  the  succeeding  year,  all  the  cocoa  trees  in  the  colo- 
ny perished.  This  calamity  was  soon  followed  by  another. 
Many  of  the  proprietors  of  estates,  after  successive  years  of  toil, 
had  acquired  an  easy  competency,  and  even  in  some  cases  a 
splendid  fortune,  with  which  to  retire  to  France,  and  to  extend 
their  means  of  enjoyment  in  advanced  age  :  but  their  commo- 
dities being  paid  for  in  the  notes  or  securities  chiefly  of  the 
Mississippi  company,  which  proved  useless,  they  returned  poor, 
and  were  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  soliciting  employment 
from  those  who  had  been  their  servants  in  their  days  of  pros- 
perity. 

This  naturally  rendered  the  India  company  an  object  of  ex- 
treme, and  in  fact  well  merited  aversion,  and  in  1722,  when  its 
agents  arrived,  this  dissatisfaction  displayed  itself  in  open  hos- 
tility— the  buildings  of  the  company  were  burnt  down,  while  the 
general  cry  was  "  Fine  le  Roi,  point  de  Compagnie"     Every 

*  Charlevoix. 


60  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

ship  coming  from  Africa  was  either  denied  admiltance  into  the 
harbour  or  interdicted  from  selling  their  cargoes  :  and  the 
governor  himself  was  even  put  under  arrest.  The  leaven  of 
discontent  spread  rapidly  and  extensively,  and  it  was  only  after 
the  holding  of  many  councils,  frequent  negocialion  with  the 
revolters,  and  considerable  concessions,  that  at  the  expiration  of 
two  years,  tranquillity  was  re-established. 

The  French  colony  from  this  period  to  the  time  of  the 
French  revolution,  progressively  and  rapidly  advanced,  exhibit- 
ing a  state  of  almost  uninterrupted  prosperity.  In  1754,  the 
various  commodities  of  the  island  amounted  to  a  million  and  a 
quarter  sterling,  and  the  imports  to  one  million  seven  hundred 
and  seventy -seven  thousand  five  hundied  and  nine  pounds. 
There  were  fourteen  thousand  white  inhabitants,  nearly  four 
thousand  free  mulattoes,  and  one  hundred  and  seventy-two 
thousand  negroes  :  five  hundred  and  ninety-nine  sugar  planta- 
tions, three  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-nine  of  indigo, 
ninety-eight  thousand  nine  hundred  and  forty-six  cocoa  trees, 
six  million  three  hundred  thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty- 
seven  cotton  plants,  and  about  twenty-two  million  cassia  trees, 
sixty-three  thousand  horses  and  mules,  ninety-three  thousand 
heads  of  horned  cattle,  six  million  banana  trees,  upwards  of  one 
million  plots  of  potatoes,  two  hundred  and  twenty-six  thousand 
of  yams,  and  near  three  million  trenches  of  raarrioc. 

In  1767  they  equipped,  three  hundred  and  forty-seven  ships 
fur  France,  in  addition  to  at  least  a  fifth  of  that  number  eu)ploy- 
ed  in  various  other  ways.  Several  years  previous  to  this  date, 
they  had  eight  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty-six  whites 
capable  of  bearing  arms-  and  one  thousand  four  hundred  and 
fourteen  mulattoes.  The  slaves  had  increased  to  two  hundred 
and  six  thousand. 

In  1776  another  line  of  demarcation  between  the  French  and 
Spanish  settlements  was  traced,  which,  though  it  encroached 
considerably  on  the  possessions  of  the  former,  was  mutually  ad- 
%'antageou5.*   After  this  time  the  Spaniards  opened  a  more  libe- 

♦  For  statistical  tables  relating  to  the  first  part,  the  reader  is  referred  to  ^pjendlx  I. 


GOVERNMENT    OF    THE    ISLAND.  61 

ral  commercial  intercourse  with  their  neighbours,  though  they 
were  never  able  to  rival  them  in  success:  but  the  Spanish  govern- 
ment, since  17S5,  having  paid  increased  attention  to  its  posses- 
sions in  this  quarter,  they  were  better  defended,  and  in  every 
view  became  more  respectable  as  a  colony. 

Before  entering  upon  the  troublous  times  of  the  French  revo- 
lution, the  remainder  of  this  chapter  may  be  properly  devoted 
to  a  general  review  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  political  constitution 
of  St.  Domingo. 

With  regard  to  the  Spanish  division,  many  of  the  church 
benefices  were  filled  by  the  secular  clergy.  It  was  made  the 
seat  of  an  archi-episcopal  see,  and  had  all  the  minor  dignities. 
The  inquisition  was  also  established  here  as  well  as  in  the  Other 
American  islands ;  though  independence  on  Rome  was  obtained 
by  express  concession.  The  inhabitants  were  divided  into  pure 
Spaniards  called  also  Chopetones,  who  visited  Acnerica  for  em- 
ployment, and  enjoyed  every  situation  of  power — Creoles,  or 
descendants  of  Europeans,  settled  in  America — JMulattoes,  or 
the  ofTspiing  of  Europeans  and  Indians — Mestizos^  or  the  off- 
spring of  Europeans  and  negroes — jVegroes  or  blacks,  who  not 
only  differ  from  other  men  in  colour,  but  in  the  singularity  of 
their  conformation,  having  high  cheek  bones,  an  elevated  fore- 
head, a  short,  broad,  flat  nose,  thick  lips,  small  ears,  and  great 
irregularity  of  shape. 

The  towns  were  governed  by  a  local  municipality,  which  how- 
ever was  extremely  feeble  and  inadequate,  confining  itself  prin- 
cipally to  minor  commercial  regulations.  Justice  was  adminis- 
tered by  six  respectable  judges,  who  formed  one  of  the  eleven 
courts  of  audience  distributed  through  the  colonies.  The  de- 
cisions of  these  courts  were  subject  to  an  appeal  to  the  council 
for  the  Indies  in  Spain,  excepting  civil  cases,  where  the  object 
of  litigation  did  not  amount  to  near  fifteen  hundred  pounds. 
The  viceroy  of  New  Spain  represented  the  head  of  government. 
The  council  overruled  every  department,  civil  and  ecclesiasti- 
cal, military  and  commercial,  and  originated  every  regulation 
to  be  passed  by  the  majority,  of  a  third  of  the  members — the 
king  being  always  understood  to  preside.    A  commercial  assembly 


62  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

was  also  formed,  and  the  local  affairs  below  these  comprised 
commandants,  and  others  still  inferior,  of  every  description. 

In  the  French  division,  of  the  island,  the  ecclesiastical  govern- 
ment was  lightly  administered  ;  but  the  forms  of  the  Koniish 
church  were  regarded,  and  the  Jesuits  held  a  firm  footing  there. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  French  part  of  St.  Domingo,  as  Mr. 
Edwards,  from  whom  the  following  statement  is  abridged,  men- 
tions, were  composed,  as  in  all  the  West  Indian  Islands,  of  three 
great  classes:  \%U  pure  whites.  2d,  people  of  colour,  and  blacks 
of  free  condition.  3d,  neg-roes  in  a  slate  of  slavery.  The  class 
which  is  called /)eo/>?^  o/'co/oM?-,  originates  from  an  inlermixtiire 
of  the  whites  and  the  blacks.  While,  as  before  stated,  the  genu- 
ine offspring  of  a  pure  white  with  a  negro  is  called  a  mulatto  ; 
there  are  various  casts,  produced  by  subsequent  connexions, 
some  of  which  approximate  the  whites,  till  all  visible  distinction 
between  them  is  lost;  whilst  others  retr«)grade  to  the  blacks. 
All  these  were  known  in  St,  Donjingo  by  the  term  sang-meUes, 
ov  gens  de  couleur,  (in  common  parlance  they  are  collectively 
called  mulattoes)  and  in  all  the  Fiench  islands,  these  people 
abound  in  far  greater  proportion  to  the  whiles  than  in  those  of 
Great  Britain. 

The  government  before  the  revolution  of  17S9.  was  exercised 
by  z,  governor  general,  and  an  officer  calfed  Intendaut,  both  of 
whom  were  nominated  by  the  crown,  on  the  reconimendation 
of  the  minister  of  the  marine,  and  generally  considered  as  esta- 
blished in  their  respective  offices  for  three  years.  Their  powers, 
in  some  cases,  were  administered  jointly ;  in  others,  they  pos- 
sessed separate  and  distinct  authority,  which  each  of  them  ex- 
ercised without  the  concurrence  or  participation  of  the  other. 

In  their  joint  administration,  their  powers  weie  unlimited  ; 
comprehending  every  part  of  colonial  government,  and  extend- 
ing even  to  detail,  in  the  minutest  branches  of  finance  and 
police.  They  enacted  the  laws,  nominated  to  all  vacant  offices, 
and  distributed  the  crown  lands  as  they  thought  proper.  They 
respectively  presided  at  the  same  time  in  each  of  the  supreme 
councils,  or  courts  of  justice  in  the  dernier  resort ;  and  as  vacan- 
cies happened  in  those  courts,  by  the  death  or  removal  of  its 


GOVERNMENT    OF    THE   ISLAND.  63 

members,  they  filled  up  the  vacant  places.  Against  the  abuse 
of  powers,  thus  extravagant  and  unbounded,  the  people  had  no 
certain  protection.  Fortunately,  it  was  rare  that  the  governor 
and  intendant  agreed  in  opinion  on  the  exercise  of  their  joint 
authority,  which  therefore  became  necessarily  relaxed ;  and 
the  inhabitants  derived  some  degree  of  security  from  the  dis- 
putes and  dissensions  of  the  contending  parties.  In  all  such 
cases,  however,  the  greatest  weight  of  authority  fell  to  the  share 
of  the  governor.  He  was,  in  truth,  an  absolute  prince,  whose 
will,  generally  speaking,  constituted  law.  ,  He  was  authorized 
to  impris^on  any  person  in  the  colony,  for  causes  of  which  he 
alone  was  the  judge  ;  and  having  at  the  same  time  the  supreme 
command  of  both  the  naval  and  military  force,  he  had  the  means 
of  exercising  this  power  whenever  he  thought  proper.  On  the 
other  hand,  no  arrest,  by  any  other  authority,  was  valid  without 
the  governor's  approbation.  Thus  he  had  power  to  stop  the 
course  of  justice,  and  to  hold  the  courts  of  civil  and  criminal 
jurisdiction  in  a  slavish  dependence  on  himself. 

It  was  the  peculiar  province  of  the  intendant  to  regulate  the 
public  revenues,  or  administer  the  finances  of  the  colony.  The 
collectors  and  receivers  of  all  duties  and  taxes  were  subject  to 
his  controul.  He  passed  or  rejected  their  accounts,  and  made 
them  such  allowances  as  he  alone  thought  proper,  and  with  him 
rested  entirely  the  application  of  all  the  public  moneys. 

The  taxes  and  duties  were  laid  and  modified,  as  occasion  re- 
quired, by  a  court  composed  of  the  governor  general,  the  inten- 
dant, the  presidents  of  the  provincial  councils,  the  attorney- 
general,  the  con)missioner  of  the  navy  (oidonattur)  and  the 
several  commandants  of  the  militia.  This  court  was  dignified 
by  the  title  of  the  Colonial  Assembly,  although  the  colonists  had 
not  a  single  delegate  in  it. 

For  the  better  administration  of  justice,  and  the  easier  col- 
lection of  the  levenues,  the  colony  was  divided  into  three  pro- 
vinces, the  northern,  the  western,  and  the  southern.  In  each  of 
these  resided  a  deputy-governor,  and  in  each  were  established 
subordinate  courts  of  civil  and  criminal  justice  ;  from  whose 
determination  appeals  were  allowed  to  the  two  superior  councils; 


64  HISTORY    OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

of  which  one  was  at  Cape  Francois  for  the  northern  province  ; 
the  other  at  Fort-au- Prince  for  the  western  and  southern.  They 
were  composed  of  the  governor-general,  the  intendant,  the  de- 
puty-governors, the  king's  lieutenants,  a  president,  and  twelve 
counsellors,  four  assexseurs,  or  assistant  judges,  together  with  the 
attorney-general  and  register.  In  these  courts  of  supreme  juris- 
diction, the  king's  edicts,  and  those  of  the  governor  and  inten- 
dant, were  registered.  Seven  members  constituted  a  quorum 
for  the  hearing  of  appeal  causes ;  but  a  hint  from  the  governor- 
general  was  always  sufficient  to  render  much  investigation  un- 
necessary. An  appeal  however  lay  to  the  king,  in  the  last  resort : 
and  on  such  appeals,  substantial  justice  was  generally  obtained. 

The  number  of  the  king's  troops  on  the  colonial  establish- 
ment, was  commonly  from  two  to  three  thousand  men  ;  and 
each  of  the  fifty-two  parishes  into  which  the  colony  was  divided, 
raised  one  or  more  companies  of  white  militia,  a  company  of 
mulattoes,  and  a  company  of  free  blacks.  The  officers,  both  of 
the  regular  troops  and  the  militia,  were  commissioned  provi- 
sionally by  the  governor-general,  subject  to  the  king's  approba- 
tion ;  but  the  militia  received  no  pay. 

Although  released  from  the  dominion  of  individuals,  yet  the 
free  men  of  colour  in  all  the  French  islands  were  still  consider- 
ed as  the  property  of  the  public,  and  as  public  property,  they 
were  obnoxious  to  the  caprice  and  tyranny  of  all  those  whom 
the  accident  of  birth  had  placed  above  them.  By  the  colonial 
governments,  they  were  treated  as  slaves  in  the  strictest  sense  ; 
being  compelled,  on  attaining  the  age  of  manhood,  to  serve 
three  years  in  a  military  establishment  called  the  marechaussee  ;^ 
and  on  the  expiration  of  that  term,  they  were  subject,  great  part 
of  the  year,  to  the  burthen  of  the  corvees  ; — a  species  of  labour 
allotted  for  the  repair  of  the  highways,  of  which  the  hardships 

*  It  consisted  of  certain  companies  of  infantry,  which  were  chiefly  employed 
as  rangers  in  clearing  the  woods  of  maron  or  runaway  slaves.  This  establishment 
was  afterwards  very  prudently  dissolved,  and  the  companies  disbanded  ;  it  ap- 
pearing that  the  mulattoes  acquired,  by  communication  with  each  other,  a  sense 
of  common  interest  and  of  common  strength,  which  was  beginning  to  render 
them  formidable  to  their  employers. — Edwards. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  ISLAND.  65 

were  insupportable.  Tbey  were  compelled  moreover  to  serve 
in  the  militia  of  the  province  or  quarter  to  which  they  belonged, 
without  any  pay  or  allowance,  and  in  the  horse  or  foot,  at  the  plea- 
sure of  the  commanding  officer  :  and  at  their  own  expense  with 
arms,  ammunition,  and  accoutrements.  Their  days  of  muster. 
were  frequent,  and  the  rigour  with  which  the  king's  lieutenants, 
majors,  and  aides-major,  enforced  their  authority  over  these 
people,  degenerated  into  the  basest  of  tyranny. 

They  were  forbidden  to  hold  any  public  office,  trust,  or  em- 
ployment, and  were  not  even  allowed  to  exercise  any  of  those 
professions,  to  which  some  sort  of  liberal  education  is  supposed 
to  be  necessary.  All  the  naval  and  military  departments,  all 
degrees  in  law,  physic,  and  divinity,  were  appropriated  exclu- 
sively by  the  whites.  A  mulatto  could  not  be  a  priest,  nor  a 
lawyer,  nor  a  physician,,  nor  a  surgeon,  nor  an  apothecary,  nor 
a  schoolmaster.  Neither  did  the  distinction  of  colour  terminate, 
as  in  the  British  West  Indies,  with  the  third  generation.  The 
taint  in  the  blood  was  incurable,  and  spread  to  the  latest  pos- 
terity. Hence  no  white  man,  who  had  the  smallest  pretensions 
to  character,  would  ever  think  of  marriage  with  a  negro  or  mu- 
latto woman  ;  such  a  step  would  immediately  have  terminated 
in  his  disgrace  and  ruin. 

The  courts  of  criminal  jurisdiction,  adopting  the  popular 
prejudices  against  them,  gave  etfect  and  permanency  to  the 
system.  A  man  of  colour  being  prosecutor,  must  have  made 
out  a  strong  case  indeed,  if  at  any  time  he  obtained  the  con- 
viction of  a  white  person.  On  the  other  hand,  the  whites  never 
failed  to  procure  prompt  and  speedy  justice  against  the  mulat- 
toes.  To  mark  more  strongly  the  distinction  between  the  two 
classes,  the  law  declared  that  if  a  free  man  of  colour  presumed 
to  strike  a  white  person  of  whatever  condition,  his  right  hand 
should  be  cut  off;  while  a  white  man,  for  a  similar  assault  on  a 
free  mulatto,  was  dismissed  on  the  payment  of  an  insignificant 
fine. 

In  extenuation  of  this  horrible  detail,  it  may  be  said  with 
truth,  that  the   manners  of  the  white  inhabitants  softened,  in 

some  measure,  the  severity  of  their  laws  :  thus,  in  the  case  last 

10 


66  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOM  IN  tiO. 

mentioned,  the  universal  abhorrence  which  would  have  attended 
an  enforcement  of  the  penalty,  made  the  law  a  dead  letter.  It 
was  the  same  with  the  Roman  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  by 
which  a  fatlicr  was  allowed  to  inflict  the  punishment  of  death 
on  his  own  child  : — manners,  not  law,  prevented  the  exertion  of 
a  power  so  unnatural  and  odious. 

But  the  circumstance  which  contributed  most  to  afford  the 
coloured  people  of  St.  Domingo  protection,  was  the  privilege 
they  possessed  of  acquiring  and  holding  property  to  any  anjount. 
Sevfeial  of  them  were  the  owners  of  con.siderable  estates;  and 
so  prevalent  was  the  influence  of  money  throughout  the  colony, 
that  n.'any  of  the  great  officers  in  the  administration  of  govern- 
ment, scj  upled  not,  secretly  to  become  their  pensioners.  Such 
of  the  coloured  people  therefore  as  had  happily  the  means  of 
gratifying  the  venality  of  their  superiors,  were  secure  enough  in 
their  persons  j  although  the  same  circumstance  made  them 
more  pointedly  the  objects  of  hatied  and  envy  to  the  lower 
orders  of  the  whites. 

The  lowest  class  of  people  in  the  French  island,  were  the 
negroes  in  a  state  of  slavety;  of  whom,  in  the  year  1789,  St. 
Domingo  contained  no  less  than  four  hundred  and  eighty  thou- 
sand. It  was  in  favour  of  this  class  that  Louis  XIV,  in  the  year 
1683,  published  the  celebrated  edict,  or  code  of  regulations, 
which  is  well  known  to  the  world  under  the  thle  of  the  Code 
^oir  ;  and  which,  in  many  of  its  provisions,  breathed  a  spirit  of 
tenderness  and  philanthruphy  highly  honourable  to  the  memory 
of  its  author. 


CHAP.  IV. 

FROM  THE  EARLIEST  PERIOD  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1789  TO 
THE  DECUEE  OF  MAY  1791. 

States  General  summoned  in  France. — Society  of  Amis  de  Noirs. — 
Declaration  of  rights. — Co/ fused  state  of  the  colony. — Decree  of 
March  8th,  1790, — Colonial  assembly  7neet  at  St.  Marc. — Decree 
of2Sth  of  May. — Proceedings  of  Peynier  and  Mauduit. — Rebellion 
of  Oge. — Committee  for  the  colonies  in  France. — Death  of  Mau- 
duit.— Decree  of  the  15th  of  May,  1791. 

The  state  of  things  in  Europe  had  been  such,  during  a  long 
period,  as  to  produce  a  political  crisis,  in  the  result  of  which 
a  very  considerable  portion  of  the  habitable  globe  has  been  di- 
rectly or  indirectly  interested.  Intelligence  of  the  commotions 
which  agitated  the  French  empire,  and  of  the  different  transac- 
tions which  began  to  excite  the  attention  of  the  almost  universal 
world  reached  the  colonies,  and  produced  corresponding  emo- 
tions. The  spirit  of  discussion  went  forth,  and  awakened 
hopes  of  political  alteration  and  improvement,  even  amongst 
those  who  seemed  doomed  to  the  bondage  of  perpetual  servi- 
tude; while  it  elicited  those  feelings,  and  roused  into  action 
those  dormant  capabilities  which  made  the  despot  tremble,  and 
the  oppressed  exult  in  a  consciousness  of  strength,  and  a  know- 
ledge of  right.  At  this  period,  the  European  revolution  unlock- 
ed the  door  which  the  active  benefactors  of  mankind  have  since 
united  to  throw  wide  open,  inviting  the  children  of  slavery  to 
go  forth  into  freedoni.  Reluctant  senates  have  heard  the  voice 
of  sympathizing  nations,  and  in  despite  of  interest  and  pride, 
have  set  their  seal  to  the  deed  of  emancipation. 

On  the  27th  of  December,  1788,  the  court  of  France  hav- 
ing come  to  the  memorable  determination  to  summon  the  states 
general  of  the  kingdom,  resolved  that  the  representation  of  the 
tiers  ^tat  (or  commons)  should  be  equal  to  the  sura  of  the  rep- 
resentation of  the  other  two  orders. 


68  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

This  measure  operated  with  immediate  effect  in  all  the  Frencli 
colonies.  The  governor  of  the  French  part  of  St.  Domingo  at 
that  period  was  M.  Duchilleau,  who  was  supposed  secretly  to 
favour  the  popular  pretensions,  and  was  therefore  allowed  to 
continue  in  his  government ;  but  by  attempting  to  prevent 
the  parochial  and  provincial  meetings  from  assembling,  his 
proclamations  were  treated  with  contempt :  the  meetings  were 
held,  and  resolutions  passed  declaratory  of  the  right  of  the 
colonists  to  send  deputies  to  the  states  general.  These  being 
elected  to  the  number  of  eighteen,  without  any  authority  either 
from  the  French  ministry  or  the  colonial  government,  embarked 
for  France  as  legal  representatives. 

About  a  month  after  the  states  general  had  declared  them- 
selves tiie  national  assembly,  they  arrived  at  Versailles;  but 
their  number  being  thought  excessive,  it  was  with  some  difficul- 
ty that  six  of  them  only  were  admitted  to  verify  their  powers, 
and  assume  their  seat. 

A  very  strong  prejudice  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  sugar 
islands,  on  account  of  the  slavery  of  their  negroes,  prevailed  at 
this  lime  in  France,  a  prejudice  which  was  daily  fomented  and 
increased  by  invectives  against  despotism  of  every  kind  :  and 
the  public  indignation  was  excited  against  the  West  Indian 
planters.  This  spirit  of  hostility  produced  a  society,  entitled 
Amis  des  Xoirs  (Friends  of  the  Blacks,)  which  circulated  their 
protests  with  such  extraordinary  zeal  and  rapidity,  that  their 
measures  became  the  topics  of  universal  conversation.  This 
society  having  secretly  in  view  to  subvert  the  ancient  despotism 
of  the  French  government,  loudly  called  for  a  general  and  im- 
mediate abolition  of  the  slave  trade,  and  of  the  slavery  which  it 
supported. 

Many  of  the  mulattoes  from  St.  Domingo  and  the  other 
French  islands,  were  at  this  time  resident  in  the  French  capital. 
Some  had  been  sent  in  early  life  for  education  :  others  were 
men  of  property,  and  persons  of  intelligence.  With  these  peo- 
ple, the  society  oi  Amis  des  JSoirs  formed  an  intimate  connex- 
ion. Their  personal  appearance  excited  pity,  and,  cooperating 
with  the  spirit  of  the  times  and  the  representations  of  those  who 


DECLARATION   OF    RIGHTS.  69 

deeply  sympatliized  upon  principles  of  humanity  with  their 
condition,  ail  ranks  of  people  became  clamorous  aj2;ainst  the 
white  colonists,  and  their  total  annihilation  was  threatened. 

On  the  twentieth  day  of  August,  the  national  assembly  made 
their  declaration  of  rights.  One  of  the  doctrines  in  particular 
contained  in  this  declaration  was  calculated  to  destroy  all  sub- 
ordination in  the  lower  classes,  that  "  all  men  are  born,  and 
continue  free  and  equal  as  to  their  rights;"  and,  accordingly,  a 
general  ferment  prevailed  among  the  French  inhabitants  of  St. 
Domingo  All  that  had  passed  in  the  mother  country  concern- 
ing the  colonists,  had  been  represented  to  them  through  the 
medium  of  party,  and  doubtless  with  a  thousand  circumstances 
of  exaggeration  and  insult;  and  the  French  government,  appre- 
hensive that  disorders  of  a  very  alarming  nature  might  arise, 
issued  orders  to  the  governor  general  of  St.  Domingo,  to  con- 
vene the  inhabitants  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  legislative 
assembly  for  interior  regulation.  These  orders,  however,  were 
anticipated.  The  inhabitants  of  the  northern  district  bad  al- 
ready constituted  a  provincial  assembly  at  Cape  Francjois,  and 
their  example  was  followed  in  the  western  and  southern  provin- 
ces; to  which  were  added  parochial  committees,  formed  to 
maintain  more  immediate  communications. 

They  often  differed  greatly  among  themselves  on  many  im- 
portant questions,  though  all  concurred  in  one  opinion,  the 
necessity  of  a  full  and  speedy  colonial  representation  ;  but  they 
determined  that  if  the  king  should  not  send  out  instructions  for 
such  an  assembly  within  three  month?,  the  colony  should  adopt 
its  own  measures. 

The  mulattoes,  during  this  period,  aware  of  the  favourable 
disposition  of  the  French  nation  towards  them,  and  incited  by 
their  brethren  in  the  metropolis,  determined  instantly  to  claim 
the  full  benefit  of  the  privileges,  which  were  enjoyed  by  the 
whites.  Large  bodies  of  them  appeared  in  arms,  but  they 
were  easily  overpowered.  It  is  said,  that  the  provincial  assem- 
blies were  disposed  to  make  concessions  to  the  mulattoes  them- 
selves ;  but  against  such  of  the  whites  as  had  taken  any  part  in 
favour  of  the  people  of  colour,  the  rage  of  the  populace  knew 


70  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

no  limits.  Hence  M.  Dubois,  deputy  procureur  general,  who 
had  sought  occasions  to  declaim  publicly  against  the  slavery  of 
the  negroes,  was  arrested  by  the  northern  assembly,  but  the 
governor  interposed  successfully  on  his  behalf. 

M.  Ferrand  de  Beaudierre,  a  magistrate  at  Petit  Goave,  was 
however  more  unfortunate.  The  parochial  committee  commit- 
ted him  to  prison  ;  whence  the  mob  took  him  by  force,  and  in 
spite  of  the  magistrates  and  municipality  put  him  to  death. 

An  order  for  convoking  a  general  colonial  assembly  was  re- 
ceived in  St.  Domingo  from  the  king  in  January  1790 — appoint- 
ing the  central  town  of  Leogane,  in  the  western  province,  for 
the  place  of  meeting.  The  instructions,  however,  being  con- 
sidered as  inapplicable  to  the  circumstances  of  the  colony,  were 
disapproved  ;  and  another  plan  of  their  own  was  adopted,  chang- 
ing both  the  place  and  time  of  meeting. 

Intelligence  of  the  confused  state  of  the  colony  was  received 
in  the  mother  country  ;  and  the  planters  of  Martinico  were 
said  to  be  equally  discontented  and  disaffected.  Apprehensive 
of  the  island  being  likely  to  declare  itself  independent,  the 
national  assembly  on  the  eighth  of  March,  1790,  entered  into 
the  consideration  of  the  subject ;  and  after  a  full  discussion,  a 
very  large  majority  voted,  "  That  it  never  was  the  intention  of 
the  assembly  to  comprehend  the  interior  government  of  the 
colonies  in  the  constitution  which  they  had  fcamed  for  the 
mother  country,  or  to  subject  them  to  laws  which  were  incom- 
patible with  their  local  establishments:  they  therefore  authorize 
the  inhabitants  of  each  colony  to  signify  to  the  National  Assem- 
bly their  sentiments  and  wishes  concerning  that  plan  of  interior 
legislation  and  commercial  arrangement,  which  would  be  most 
conducive  to  their  piosperity.  To  this  decree  was  added  a 
declaration,  *'  That  the  National  Assembly  would  not  cause  any 
innovation  to  be  made,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  any  system  of 
commerce  in  which  the  colonies  were  already  concerned." 

This  decree,  it  is  easy  to  imagine,  occasioned  among  the 
people  of  colour,  and  the  society  of  Amis  des  Noirs,  great  agi- 
tation :  it  was  interpreted  as  a  tacit  sanction  of  the  slave  trade  j 
and  it  was  even  contended,  that  the  National  Assembly,  bV 


MEETING  OF  THE  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY.  1     71 

leaving  the  adjustment   of  the  colonial   constitution;}  to  the 
colonists  theniselves,  had  discharged  them  from  their  allegiance. 

The  general  assembly  of  St.  Domingo,  consisting  of  two  hun- 
dred and  thirteen  members,  twenty  four  from  the  city  of  Cape 
Fran9ais,  sixteen  from  Fort  au-Prince,  and  eight  from  Aux 
Cayes,  met  on  the  sixteenth  of  April  1790,  at  St.  Marc  Most 
of  the  other  parishes  returned  two  representatives  each.  But 
the  provincial  asseniblies  continued  in  the  exercise  of  their  self- 
appointed  functions. 

One  of  the  first  measures  was  to  relieve  the  people  of  colour 
fron,  4,he  hardships  to  which  they  were  subject  under  the  mili- 
tary jurisdiction  ;  so  that  in  future  no  greater  duty  ttas  to  be 
required  of  them  in  the  militia  tl)an  from  the  whites.  In  the 
next  place  they  proceeded  to  rectify  some  gross  abu|>es  wiiicb 
had  prevailed  in  the  courts  of  judicature,  confining  th^^mselves, 
however,  to  such  only  as  called  for  immediate  redress,  and 
chiefly  to  the  great  object  of  preparing  the  plan  for  a  i\^\v  system 
of  colonial  government ;  which  employed  their  deliberations  till 
the  twenty-eighth  of  May. 

From  M.  Peynier,  the  present  governor  general,  the  adherents 
of  the  ancient  despotism  secretly  derived  encouragement  and 
support ;  but  while  these  persons  opposed  themselves  to  the  new 
order  of  things,  the  Chevalier  Mauduit,  colonel  of  the  regiment 
of  Port-au-Prince,  arrived  at  St.  Domingo;  and  by  his  talents, 
dexterity,  zeal,  and  address,  soon  acquired  an  ascendency  over 
Peynier,  and  governed  the  colony  in  his  name.  He  saw  that  it 
was  necessary  to  prevent  a  coalition  of  interests  between  the 
colonial  assembly,  and  the  free  people  of  colour.  He  therefore 
proclaimed  himself  ihe  patron  and  protector  of  the  mulattoes, 
and  by  his  assiduity  effectually  gained  over  the  entire  body. 

If  the  planters  had  remained  united  among  themselves,  it 
seems  probable  that  the  tranquillity  of  the  country  would  have 
been  preserved  ;  but  the  provincial  assembly  of  the  North, 
counteracted  by  all  possible  means,  the  proceedings  of  the 
general  assembly  at  St.  Marc.  Appearances  seemed  to  indicate 
an  approaching  civil  war,  even  before  the  plan  for  the  new  con- 
stitation  was  published.    This  was  contained  in  the  decree  of 


72  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

the  general  colonial  assembly  of  the  twenty-eighth  of  May, 
which  consisted  of  ten  fundamental  positions,  which  are  prece- 
ded by  an  introductory  discourse  or  preamble  (as  usual  in  the 
French  decrees)  wherein,  among  other  considerations,  it  is  sta- 
ted, as  an  acknowledged  principle  in  the  French  constitution, 
that  the  right  in  the  crown  to  confirm  the  acts  of  the  legislature, 
is  a  prerogative,  inherent  and  incommunicable.  The  articles  are 
as  follow : — 

"  1.  The  legislative  authority,  in  every  thing  which  relates  to 
the  internal  concerns  of  the  colony  (regime  interieur)  is  vested 
in  the  assembly  of  its  representatives,  which  shall  be  QJled 
"  The  General  Assembly  of  the  French  part  of  St.  Domins^o.]'' 

2.  No  act  of  the  legislative  body,  in  what  relates  to  the  inter- 
nal concerns  of  the  colony,  shall  be  considered  as  a  law  definitive, 
unless  it  be  made  by  the  representatives  of  the  French  part 
of  St.  Domingo,  freely  and  legally  chosen,  and  confirmed  by 
the  king. 

3.  In  cases  of  urgent  necessity,  a  legislative  decree  of  the 
general  assembly,  in  what  relates  to  the  internal  concerns  of  the 
colony,  shall  be  considered  as  a  laiv  provisional.  In  all  such 
cases,  the  decree  shall  be  notified  forthwith  to  the  governor 
general,  who,  within  ten  days  after  such  notification,  shall  cause 
it  to  be  published  and  enforced,  or  transmit  to  the  general  assem- 
bly his  observations  thereon. 

4.  The  necessity  of  the  case  on  which  the  execution  of  such 
provisional  decree  is  to  depend,  shall  be  a  separate  question,  and 
be  carried  in  the  afi&rmative  by  a  majority  of  two-thirds  of  the 
general  assembly ;  the  names  and  numbers  being  taken  down. 
(Prise  par  Vappel  nominal.) 

5.  If  the  governor  general  shall  send  down  his  observations 
on  any  such  decree,  the  same  shall  be  entered  in  the  journals  of 
the  general  assembly,  wAo  shall  then  proceed  to  revise  the  de- 
cree, and  consider  the  observations  thereon  in  three  several  sit- 
tings. The  votes  for  confirming  or  annulling  the  decree  shall  be 
given  in  the  words  Fes  or  JVo;  and  a  minute  of  the  proceedings 
shall  be  signed  by  the  members  present,  in  which  shall  be  enu- 
merated thq  votes  on  each  side  of  the  question  ;  and  if  there  ap- 


DECREE    OF    MAY    1790.  73 

pears  a  majority  of  two-thirds  for  confirming  the  decree,  it  shall 
be  immediately  enforced  by  the  governor  general. 

6.  As  every  law  ought  to  be  founded  on  the  consent  of  those 
who  are  to  be  bound  by  it,  the  French  part  of  St.  Domingo 
shall  be*allo\ved  to  propose  regulations  concerning  pommercial 
arrangements,  and  the  system  of  mutual  connexion  (rapports 
coinmerciaux,  et  autres  rapports  communs,)  and  the  decrees  which 
the  national  assembly  shall  make  in  all  such  cases  shall  not  be 
enforced  in  the  colony,  until  the  general  assembly  shall  have  con- 
sented thereto. 

7.  In  cases  of  pressing  necessity,  the  importation  of  articles 
for  the  support  of  the  inhabitants  shall  not  be  considered  as 
any  breach  in  the  system  of  commercial  regulations  between 
St.  Dumingo  and  France  ;  provided  that  the  decrees  to  be 
made  in  such  cases  by  the  general  assembly  shall  be  submitted 
to  the  revision  of  the  governor  general,  under  the  same  condi- 
tions and  modifications  as  are  prescribed  in  articles  three  and 
five. 

8.  Provided  also,  that  every  legislative  act  of  the  general 
assembly,  executed  provisionally,  in  cases  of  urgent  necessity, 
shall  be  transmitted  forthwith  for  the  royal  sanction.  And  if 
the  king  shall  refuse  his  consent  to  any  such  act,  its  execution 
shall  be  suspended,  as  soon  as  the  king's  refusal  shall  be  legally 
notified  to  the  general  assembly. 

9.  A  new  general  assembly  shall  be  chosen  every  two  years, 
and  none  of  the  members  who  have  served  in  the  former  assem- 
bly shall  be  eligible  in  the  new  one. 

JO.  The  general  assentbly  decree  that  the  preceding  articles, 
as  forming  pait  of  the  constitution  of  the  French  colony  in  St. 
Domingo,  shall  be  immediately  transujitled  to  France  for  the 
acceptance  of  the  national  assembly,  and  the  king.  They  shall 
likewise  be  transmitted  to  all.  the  parishes  and  districts  of  the 
colony,  and  be  notified  to  the  governor  general." 

Some  of  these  articles  are  evidently  irreconcileable  to  every 
just  principle  of  colonial  subordination  :  and  the  most  prevalent 
opinion  was,  that  a  serious  intention  was  entertained  of  decla- 
ring the  colony  an  independent  state,  in  imitation  of  the  Ens- 

11 


74  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

lish  American  provinces ;  and  it  was  said  that  the  colony  was 
sold  to  the  English  at  forty  millions  of  livres. 

Some  of  the  Western  parishes  recalled  their  deputies;  and 
the  inhabitants  of  Cape  Francois  instantly  renouncing  obedience 
to  the  general  assembly:  presented  a  memorial  to  the  governor, 
requesting  him  forthwith  to  dissolvt  it.  This  proceeding  was 
sufficiently  agreeable  to  M.  Peynier,  whose  views  were  promo- 
ted by  another  circumstance.  In  the  harbour  of  Port-au-Pii:ice 
lay  a  ship  of  the  line,  called  the  Leopard,  commanded  by  M. 
Galisoniere,  who  in  consequence  of  co-operating  in  the  design 
of  Peynier  and  Mauduii,  gave  offence  to  his  sailors,  who  with- 
drew their  obedience  and  declared  themselves  to  be  in  the 
interests  of  the  colonial  assembly  !  M.  Galisoniere  at  length 
quitted  the  ship,  upon  which  the  crew  gave  the  command  to  one 
of  the  lieutenants.  The  assembly  immediately  transmitted  a 
vote  of  thanks,  requiring  of  them,  in  the  name  of  the  law  and 
the  king,  to  detain  the  ship  in  the  road,  and  await  their  further 
orders.  The  sailors  promised  obedience,  affixed  the  vote  of 
thanks  on  the  main  mast  of  the  ship;  while  some  of  their  parti- 
zans  took  possession  of  a  powder  magazine  at  l^eogane. 

Two  days  afterwards,  M.  Peynier  issued  a  proclamation  to 
dissolve  the  general  assembly;  charginii;  the  members  with  en- 
tertaining projects  of  independency,  and  asserting  that  they  had 
treacherously  possessed  themselves  of  one  of  the  king's  ship  by 
corrupting  the  crew.  He  pronounced  tbem  and  their  adherents 
traitors  to  their  country  and  king :  declaring  his  intention  of 
employing  all  the  force  he  could  collect  to  bring  them  to  con- 
dign punishment. 

Having  determined  to  arrest  the  committee  of  the  western 
provincial  assembly,  he  commissioned  M.  Mauduit  to  undertake 
the  enterprise,  who  being  informed  that  this  committee  ht  Id 
consultations  at  midnight,  selected  one  hundred  of  his  soldiers  to 
sieze  the  members.  On  arriving  however  at  the  house,  he  found 
it  protected  by  four  hundred  of  the  national  guards.  A  skir- 
mish ensued  ;  two  men  were  killed  on  the  part  of  the  assembly ; 
several  were  wounded  on  both  sides,  and  M.  Mauduit  returned 
without  effecting  any  thing  more  than  seizing,  and  bearing  away 
in  triumph,  the  national  colours. 


ATTACK    ON    THE    WESTERN    COMMITTEE.  76 

On  receiving  intelligence  of  this  attack,  the  general  assembly 
summoned  the  people  to  llie  protection  of  tbeir  representatives^ 
from  all  parts  of  the  colony,  and  most  of  them  obeyed  j  but  the 
Northern  provincial  assembly  joined  the  paity  of  the  governor, 
and  sent  to  his  assistance  a  detachment  from  the  regular  troops 
in  that  quarter,  which  was  joined  by  a  body  of  two  hundred 
mulaitoes.  A  much  greater  force  was  collected  at  the  same 
time  in  the  Western  province  by  M.  Mamiuit,  and  the  prepara- 
tions on  both  sides  threatened  a  sanguinary  conflict;  when,  a 
sudden  stop  was  put  to  thi?  civil  war,  by  the  unexpected  deter- 
mination of  the  general  assembly  to  undertake  a  voyage  to 
France,  and  justify  their  conduct  to  the  king  and  the  national 
assembly  in  person.  Their  numbers  were  at  this  time  reduced 
by  sickness  and  desertion  to  about  one  hundred  members,  tighty- 
five  (of  whom  sixly-fuur  were  fathers  of  families)  embarked  on 
board  the  Leopard,  and  on  the  eigt)th  of  August  took  their  de- 
parture for  Europe  :— ^a  proceeding  which  greatly  surprised  the 
governor  and  his  party,  while  it  filled  the  populace  with  admi- 
ration at  what  they  conceived  to  be  a  signal  instance  of  virtue 
and  forbeaiance  ;  for  at  this  moment  two  thousand  men  from 
the  Southern  and  Western  provinces,  were  in  full  march  for  Port- 
au-Prince  to  undertake  tbeir  defence.  Tears  of  sensibility  and 
affection  were  shed  at  their  departure  by  all  classes  of  people, 
and  the  parties  in  arms  appeared  mutually  disposed  to  submit  their 
differences  to  the  king  and  the  national  assembly.  M.  Peynier 
resumed  the  government :  but  with  feelings  of  no  inconsidera- 
ble apprehension. 

No  sooner  was  one  source  of  contention  removed,  than  ano- 
ther still  more  alarming  presented  itself  in  the  rebellion  of 
James  Oge,  a  young  mulattoe,  of  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
whose  mother  had  a  coffee  plantation  in  the  Northern  province, 
about  thirty  miles  from  Cape  Francois.  She  lived  very  credit- 
ably, and  found  means  to  educate  her  son  at  Paris,  where  she 
supported  him  in  some  degree  of  affluence,  after  he  had  obtain- 
ed the  age  of  manhood. 

Oge  had  been  introduced  to  the  meetings  of  the  Amis  de  JVoirs, 
under  the  patronage  of  Gregoire,  Brissot,  La  Fayette,  and  Ro- 


76  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

bespierre,  the  leading  members  of  that  society ;  and  was  by 
them  initiated  into  the  popular  doctrine  of  equality,  and  the 
rights  of  man. 

Induced  to  believe,  that  the  whole  body  of  coloured  people 
in  the  French  islands  were  prepared  to  rise  up  against  i»heir  op- 
pressors; and  that  nothing  was  wanting  but  a  discreet  leader  to 
set  them  in  motion,  he  determined  to  proceed  to  St.  Domingo; 
and  for  this  purpose  the  society  procured  him  the  rank  of  lieu- 
tenant-colonel in  the  army  of  one  of  the  German  electors.  The 
chief  diffirulty  was  to  export  arms  and  ammunition  from  France, 
without  attracting  the  notice  of  the  government,  and  awakening 
suspicion  among  the  planters.  Og6  was  therefore  recommend- 
ed to  njake  a  circuitous  voyage  to  iN'orth  Ameiica  for  that  pur- 
pose. His  whole  project,  however,  was  publicly  known  at  Paris 
previous  to  Oge's  embarkation,  and  notice  of  the  scheme,  and 
even  a  portrait  o^'  Oge  himself,  were  transmitted  to  St.  Domin- 
go, long  befoic  his  airival  in  the  island  ;  where  he  secretly  land- 
ed on  the  twelfth  of  October,  1790. 

Six  week?  afterwards,  he  wrote  to  the  governor  (Peynier.)  and 
after  reproaching  him  and  his  predecessors  with  the  non-execu- 
tion of  tbe  Code  J\'oir,  lie  demanded  that  the  provisions  of  that 
statute  should  be  enfuiced  throughout  the  colony,  and  that  the 
privileges  enjoyed  by  the  whites  should  be  extended  to  all,  de- 
claiing  himself  the  protector  of  the  mulattoes  by  force  of  arms, 
unless  their  wrongs  were  redressed.  The  previous  period  from 
the  time  of  his  landing  had  been  occupied  in  conjunction  with 
his  two  brotlters,  in  spreading  disaffection,  and  exciting  revolt  j 
but  Oge  was  able  to  alluie  on!)  abnut  two  hundred. followers  to 
his  standard,  uiostof  whom  were  undisciplined  and  totally  averse 
to  order. 

His  camp  was  established  at  Grande  Hiviere,  about  fifteen  miles 
from  Cape  Francois,  where  his  two  brothers,  and  one  Mark 
Chavane,  were  his  lieutenants.  These  men  were  of  a  different 
character  from  their  chief,  who  is  represented  as  mild  in  tem- 
per, though  enthusiastic  in  principle;  while  they  comniiltfd 
many  murders  and  exercised  severe  despotism  with  unhesitating 
cruelty.     A  mulatto  man  of  some  property  being  urged  to  fol^ 


SUPPRESSION    OF    THE    REVOLT.  77 

iow  them,  excused  himself  by  pointing  to  his  wife  and  children, 
which  being  considered  as  contumacious,  the  man  and  his  whole 
family  were  massacred. 

Measures  for  suppressing  this  revolt  were  promptly  adopted 
and  vigorously  executed  A  body  of  troops,  and  the  Cape  re- 
giment of  militia,  were  dispatched  to  the  camp  of  the  revolters, 
which  they  soon  invested  ;  many  of  them  were  killed,  about  six- 
ty made  prisoners,  and  the  rest  dispersed.  Oge  himself,  one  of 
his  brothers,  and  Chavane  his  associate,  took  refuge  amongst 
the  Spaniards. 

These  circumstances  tended  to  aggravate  the  animosity  alrea- 
dy subsisting  between  the  whites  and  mulaltoes ;  the  latter  of 
whom  flew  to  arms,  and  formed  encampments  at  Artibonite, 
Petit  Goaves,  Jeremie,  and  Aux  Cayes.  But  the  largest  and 
most  formidable  body  assembled  near  the  small  town  of  Verette; 
at  which  place,  singly  and  unattended,  Colonel  Mauduit  had  a 
conference  with  their  leaders,  whom  h#persuaded  to  influence 
the  mulattoes  to  retire  to  their  habitations.  By  what  means 
this  was- e  flee  ted,  it  has  never  been  discovered,  but  they  have 
been  represented  as  not  very  honorable.  He  was  even  charged 
with  traitorously  persuading  them  not  to  desist  from  their  pur- 
pose, but  only  to  postpone  it  to  another  opportunity  ;  assuring 
them  that  the  king  himself,  and  all  the  friends  of  the  ancient  go- 
vernment, were  secretly  attached  to  their  cause,  and  would  avow 
and  support  it  whenever  they  could  do  it  with  advantage.  He 
is  said  to  have  acted  in  a  similar  manner  at  other  places  ;  hold- 
ing secret  consultations  with  the  chiefs  of  the  mulattoes,  who,  in 
consequence  of  his  intimations,  every  where  dispersed  imme- 
diately. 

In  November,  1790,  M.  Peynier  resigned  the  government 
and  embarked  for  Europe  ;  and  M.  Blanchelande,  the  new  com- 
mander in  chief,  made  a  peremptoiy  demand  of  Oge  and  bis 
associates  from  the  Spaniards  ;  the  wretched  chief  and  his  cocn- 
panions  were  immediately  delivered  up  to  a  detaclunent  of 
French  troops,  and  safely  lodged  in  the  jail  of  Cape  Francois, 
when  a  commission  was  issued  to  bring  them  to  trial  Aft^r  fre- 
quent examinations,  sentence  was  pronounced  in  the  beginmng 


78  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

of  March,  1791.  Twenty  of  Oge's  followers,  among  them  his 
own  brother,  were  condemned  to  be  hanged.  Himself,  and  his 
lieutenant  Cbavane,  were  adjudged  to  be  broken  on  the  wheel. 
The  latter  met  his  fate  with  unusual  firmness  ;  but  the  fortitude 
of  Oge  deserted  him  altogether.  He  earnestly  implored  mer- 
cy, promising  to  make  great  discoveries,  if  bis  life  was  spared  : 
a  respite  of  twenty-four  hours  was  accordingly  granted  ;  but  it 
was  not  then  known  that  he  divulged  any  thing  of  importance  ; 
but  it  afterwards  appeared  that  he  not  only  made  a  full  confes- 
sion of  the  facts  already  recited,  but  also  disclosed  a  dreadful 
plot  in  ajjitation,  and  detailed  the  measures  which  the  coloured 
people  had  adopted  to  excite  the  negro  slaves  to  rebellion. 

The  persons  before  whom  this  confession,  sworn  to  and  sign- 
ed, was  made,  were  commissioners  appointed  by  the  superior 
council  of  the  Northern  province.  For  what  reasons  the  evi- 
dence was  suppressed,  has  never  been  satisfactorily  explained. 
Such  however  was  theTact;  and  the  wretched  Oge  hurried  to 
immediate  execution. 

To  return  to  the  eighty-five  members  of  the  colonial  assem- 
bly, who  embarked  fur  France.  They  airived  at  Brest  on  the 
thirteenth  of  September,  1790,  where  they  were  received  on 
landing  by  all  ranks  of  people,  with  every  token  of  respect ; 
but  soon  afterwards  they  met  with  a  very  different  reception  at 
the  capital,  where  deputies  had  already  arrived  from  the  pro- 
vincial assembly  of  the  North,  who  had  effectually  prejudiced 
M.  Barnave,  the  president  of  the  committee  for  the  colonies. 
The  national  assembly  indignantly  dismissed  them  from  their 
bar.  and  refused  their  subsequent  solicitation  to  be  confronted 
with  their  adversaries.  In  October,  a  rf^port  of  the  committee 
for  the  colonies  was  presented  by  M.  Barnave,  censuring  all  (he 
proceedings  of  the  colonial  assembly,  from  its  first  meeting  at 
St.  Marc's  ;  and  concluding  in  these  words,  *'  That  all  the  pre- 
tended decrees  and  acts  of  the  said  colonial  assembly,  should 
be  reversed,  and  pronounced  utteily  null  and  of  no  effect :  that 
the  said  assembly  should  be  declared  dissolved,  and  its  members 
rendered  ineligible  and  incapable  of  being  delegated  in  future 
to  the  colonial  assembly  of  St.  Domingo  j  that  testimonies  of 


DISLIKE    OP   MAUDUIT.  79 

approbation  should  be  transmitted  to  the  Northern  provincial 
assembly,  to  Colonel  Mauduit  and  the  regiment  of  Port-au- 
Prince,  for  resisting  the  proceedings  at  St.  Marc's;  that  the 
king  should  be  requested  to  give  orders  for  the  forming  a  new 
colonial  assembly  on  the  principles  of  the  national  decree  of 
the  eighth  of  March,  1790,  and  instructions  of  the  twenty -eighth 
of  the  same  month  ;  finally  that  the  ci-devant  members,  then  in 
France,  should  continue  in  a  state  of  arrest,  until  the  national 
assembly  might  find  time  to  signify  its  further  pleasure  concern- 
ing them." 

This  decree  excited  the  utmost  indignation  in  St,  Domingo, 
where  it  was  considered  by  most  other  persons  as  resulting  from 
a  dereliction  of  all  principle  ;  and  many  of  the  parishes  posi- 
tively refused  to  choose  other  deputies  till  the  fate  of  their  mem- 
bers in  France  should  be  decided,  whoTi  they  still  considered 
as  the  legal  representatives  of  the  colony.  Mauduit  and  his 
regiment  became  increasingly  the  objects  of  popular  resentment, 
but  he  vras  in  the  end  assassinated  by  those  very  men  who  had 
once  shewn  him  the  most  devoted  attachment. 

The  circumstance  of  M.  Mauduit's  carrying  off  the  colours 
from  a  detachment  of  the  national  guards,  has  been  already 
mentioned  ;  the  consequetice  of  which  was,  that  not  only  that 
detachment,  but  the  whole  of  the  guards  throughout  the  colony 
considered  this  act  as  an  unpardonable  insult,  and  were  only 
restrained  from  immediate  revenge  by  the  dread  they  felt  of  the 
superior  discipline  of  the  veterans  who  composed  the  regiment 
which  Mauduit  commanded.  Hence  both  were  regarded  with 
the  utmost  detestation. 

In  March,  1791,  the  frigates  Le  Fougueux  and  Le  Boree  ar- 
rived from  France  with  a  reinforcement  of  troops,  who  having 
communicated  with  the  crew  of  the  Leopard,  the  ship  that  car- 
ried out  the  aiembers  of  the  colonial  assembly  to  France,  on 
their  landing  at  Port-au-Prince,  manifested  the  same  hostility 
towards  Mauduit's  regiment,  as  was  evinced  by  the  national 
guards.  They  refused  all  intercourse,  and  treated  them  as  ene- 
mies to  the  colony  and  traitors  to  their  country.  This  of  course, 
produced  a  powerful  impression  on  both  officers  and  privates, 


80  HISTORY   OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

mutual  reproach  spread  amongst  them,  the  white  feather  was 
indignantly  torn  from  their  hats,  and  dark  and  sullen  looks  indi- 
cated that  their  confimander  had  lost  their  confidence  and  affec- 
tion. M.iuduit  perceived  his  danger,  and  fearing  to  involve  the 
governor  and  his  family  in  the  ruin  he  anticipated  for  himself, 
advised  them  to  make  the  best  of  their  way  to  Cape  Franqois, 
which  they  accordingly  did.  Mauduit  then  harangued  his  grena- 
diers, proposing  to  restore  the  colours  which  he  had  formerly 
taken,  and  even  with  his  own  hands,  at  the  head  of  hi?  regiment, 
to  deposit  them  in  the  church ;  adding,  that  he  depended  on  them 
to  protect  him  from  intuit,  which  the  faithless  grenadiers  readi- 
ly promised. 

On  the  following  day,  the  ceremony  took  place  before  a  vast 
crowd  of  spectators  :  but  at  the  moment  he  turned  to  witness 
the  applauses  of  his  soldiers,  one  of  tluni  tried  aloud,  that  he 
must  ask  pardon  of  the  national  gua7-ds  on  his  knees.  Mauduit 
started,  and  presented  them  in>tead  his  bosom  bared  to  their 
swords: — it  was  instantly  pierced  with  a  hundred  wounds,  inflict- 
ed by  his  own  men,  to  whom  he  had  so  frequently  shewn  every 
kindness.  The  spectators  stood  silent  and  motionless  ;  two  of- 
ficers only  exerted  themselves  but  in  vain  on  his  behalf;*  and 
dissatisfied  with  mere  assassination,  the  most  horrible  enormities 
were  practised  on  the  dead  body.  This  dastardly  proceeding 
met  its  proper  recompense  ;  the  other  troops  detested  the  regi- 
ment which  had  perpetrated  the  deed  of  blood,  and  being  com- 

*  This  is  mentioned  in  tbe  following  coinniunication  which  Mr.  Edwards  states 
that  he  received  from  St.  Domingo.  "  Les  grenadiers  du  regiment  de  Mauduit, 
et  d'autres  voix  parties  de  la  foule.  demandent  que  ie  Colonel  fasse  reparation  a 
la  garde  nationale.  On  6xige  qu'il  fasse  des  excuses  pour  I'insulte  qu'il  lui  a  fait. 
II  prononce  les  excuses  qu'on  lui  demande  ;  ses  grenadiers  ne  sont  points  satis- 
faits,  ils  veulent  qu'il  les  fasse  a  genoux.  Une  rumeur  terrible  se  fait  entendre  : 
ce  fut  alors  que  plusieurs  citoyens,  mcme  de  cnix  que  Mauduit  aioit  leplus  vexc, 
fendent  ia  foule,  et  cherclient  a  le  soustraire  au  mouvement  qui  se  preparoit.  On 
a  VQ  i!ans  ce  moment  le  hr'ive  B'-ausoleil,  apr^s  avoir  ete  attient  d'un  coup  de  feu 
ii  laffaire  du  29  au  30  luillet,  en  defendant  le  comite  recevoicun  coup  de  sabre  en 
prof<*geant  les  jour  de  Mauluit.  On  peutrendre  justice  aussi  a  deux  offic'ers  de 
Mauduit:  Gakseau  et  Gcmnin  n'ayanf  pasabandonn^  leur  Colonel  jusqu'au  der- 
nier moment;  mais  rinuignatiou  des  soldat  6loit  a  son  comble,  et  il  n'otoit  plu.< 
temp." 


NATIONAL   DECREE. 


8^1 


pelied  to  lay  down  their  arms,  they  were    sent  prisoners  to 
France. 

During  these  transactions,  the  society  of  Amis  des  Jsfoirs  In 
the  mother  country,  was  employed  in  devising  projects  of  still 
greater  enormity.  There  was  reason  to  believe  that  the  mulat- 
toes  were  disposed  to  conciliation  with  the  whites,  who  also  had 
obvious  reasons  on  their  part  to  desire  it.  M.  Barnave  alone, 
the  president  of  the  colonial  committee  in  France,  avowed  his 
conviction  that  any  further  Interference  of  the  mother  country, 
would  be  prejudicial  to  her  essential  interests,  an  opinion  which, 
hmvever  entitled  to  respect  from  such  a  man,  was  heard  without 
effect.  The  principal  members,  Gregoire,  La  Fayette,  Brlssot, 
and  others,  determined  to  call  in  the  supreme  legislative  authori- 
ty of  the  French  government  to  further  their  designs.  The 
reader  will  recollect  the  national  decree  of  the  eighth  of  March, 
1790,  by  which  the  national  assembly  disclaimed  all  right  of  in- 
terference in  the  local  and  interior  concerns  of  the  colonies ; 
but  as  much  as  possible  to  nullify  this  resolution,  it  had  been  in- 
sidiously proposed,  within  a  few  days  after  it  had  passed,  to 
transmit  with  it  to  the  governor  of  St.  Domingo,  certain  instruc- 
tions for  its  due  observance.  •  These  consisted  of  eighteen  arti- 
cles, among  which  was  a  direction  "  that  every  person  of  the 
age  of  twenty-five  and  upwards,  possessing  property,  or  having 
resided  two  years  in  the  colony,  and  paid  taxes,  should  be  per- 
mitted to  vote  in  the  formation  of  the  colonial  assenibly.'' 

The  advocates  of  this  measure,  pretended  that  it  went  only  to 
the  modification  of  the  piivilege  of  voting  in  the  parochial 
meetings ;  but  no  sooner  were  they  adopted  and  converted  into 
a  decree,  than  the  mulattoes  resident  in  the  mother  country,  as 
well  as  the  society  of  Amis  des  J^jirs,  hastened  to  apprize  th^ir 
agents  in  St.  Domingo,  that  the  people  of  colour,  nut  being  ex- 
cepted, were  viitually  comprised  in  it,  and  were  at  length  per- 
suaded to  send  deputies  to  France  to  obtain  an  explanation  of  it 
from  the  national  assembly. 

Tlie  su!)ject  was  brouglit  forward  by  the  Abbe  Gregoire,  who 
supported  with  all  his  eloquence  the  claim  of  the  free  mulattoes 
to  the  lull  benefit  of  the  instructions  of  the  twenty-eighth  of 


82  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

March,  1790,  and  to  all  the  rights  and  privileges  enjoyed  by  the 
white  inhabitants  of  the  French  colonies.  The  news  of  the 
death  of  Oge  arrived  in  Paris  at  the  same  time,  and  excited  in- 
dignation in  the  minds  of  all  ranks  of  people  against  the  planters, 
who  for  a  lin)e  dared  not  appear  in  the  streets  of  Paris.  "Perish 
the  colonies,"  said  Robt  spierre,  "  rather  than  sacrifice  one  iota 
of  our  principles."  The  majority  reiterated  the  sentiment, and 
the  decree  of  the  fifteenth  of  May,  1791,  by  which  it  was  enact- 
ed, "  that  the  people  of  colour  resident  in  the  French  colonies, 
born  of  free  parents,  were  entitled  to,  as  of  right,  and  should  be 
allowed  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  privileges  of  French  citizens, 
and,  among  others,  to  those  of  having  votes  in  the  choice  of  re- 
presentatives, and  o^  being  eligible  to  seats  both  in  the-  parochial 
and  colonial  assemblies,^^  w2isproT\oanced  amidst  the  acclamations 
of  the  people.  The  colonial  committee,  of  which  M.  Barnave 
was  president,  immediately  suspended  its  functions,  and  declar- 
ed itself  useless,  and  the  deputies  from  the  colonies  declined  any 
further  attendance.  The  only  effect,  however,  produced  on  the 
national  assembly,  was  an  order  that  the  three  civil  commission- 
ers, who  had  been  previously  appointed  for  regulating  the  affairs 
of  the  colonies  on  the  spot,  should  immediately  repair  thither, 
to  see  to  the  enforcement  of  the  national  decrees. 


CHAP.  V. 

FROM   THE   MONTH    OF    MAY,   1791,  TO    THE    CONFLAGRATION   OF 
THE    TOWN    OF    CAPE    FRANCOIS    IN    1793. 

Resentment  agai?ist  the  decree  of  the  fifteenth  of  May. — Revolt  of  the 
Negroes  in  the  North. — Anecdote  of  the  extraordinary  fidelity  (fa 
Negro. — Insurrection  of  the  Western  division. — Concordat  of  the 
eleventh  of  September. — Proclamation  of  the  General  Assembly. — 
New  disturbances. — Civil  Commissioners  sent  by  the  National  Assem- 
bly.— Decree  of  the  fourth  of  April,  1792. — A  new  governor  and 
other  commissioners  appointed. — Their  violence. — M.  Galbaud  made 
Governor. — Disputes  with  the  Commissioners  and  dispossession  of 
his  office. — His  brother  unites  with  him  to  oppose  the  Commissioners 
by  force. — The  latter  call  in  the  aid  of  the  revolted  Negroes. — Con- 
flagration of  the  Capital  and  Massacre  of  the  fVhite  Inhabitants, 

Whe?j  the  intelligence  of  the  decree  of  May,  1791,  arrived 
at  Cape  Franqois,  the  utmost  rage  and  indignation  circulated 
throughout  the  colony ;  especially  in  the  town  of  the  Cape, 
which  had  hitherto  been  foremost  in  professions  of  attachment 
to  the  mother  country.  It  was  now  unanimously  determined  to 
reject  the  civic  oath,  and  even  proposed  to  seize  all  the  ships, 
and  confiscate  the  effects  of  the  French  merchants  then  in  the 
harbour.  The  national  cockade  was  trodden  under  foot,  and 
the  authority  of  the  governor-general,  with  every  idea  of  colo- 
nial subordination,  were  annihilated  in  a  moment. 

The  several  parishes  proceeded,  without  hesitation,  to  the 
election  of  deputies  for  a  new  general  colonial  assembly,  which 
met  at  Leograve,  on  the  ninth  of  August,  to  the  number  of  one 
hundred  and  seventy-six,  and  declared  themselves  the  general 
assem^bly  of  the  French  part  of  St.  Domingo. 

M.  Bianchelande,  during  these  transactions  remained  a  politi- 


u4  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

cal  cypher.  He  wrote  to  the  king's  ministers,  and  sent  a  copy 
of  his  communication  to  the  provincial  assembly,  with  a  solemn 
assurance,  that  he  would  suspend  the  execution  of  the  obnoxious  de- 
cree, whemver  it  should  come  out  to  him  properly  authenticated. 

Alarmed  at  these  proceedings,  the  n)ulaitoes  began  to  collect 
in  armed  bodies,  without  any  hindrance  from  the  wliites,  whose 
thoughts  were  universally  directed  towaids  the  meeting  of  the 
new  colonial  assembly,  fondly,  but  fallaciously  expecting  from  it 
the  immediate  redress  of  all  existing  grievances. 

On  the  twenty-third  of  August,  just  before  day-break,  a  gene- 
ral alarm  spread  thioughout  the  town  of  the  Cape,  that  all  the 
negro  slaves  in  ihe  neighbouring  parishes  had  revolted,  and  were 
carrying  death  and  desolation  over  the  plantations.  The  gover- 
nor, assembled  the  military  officers  ;  but  the  reports  were  too 
confused  and  contradictory  to  gain  much  credit  till  day-light 
brought  with  it  tnany  who  had  scarcely  escaped  the  massacre, 
and  fled  to  the  town  ftjr  proteclion. 

They  disclosed  that  the  insurrection  originated  on  a  planta- 
tion called  Noe,  in  the  parish  of  Vcul,  nine  miles  only  from  the 
city,  where  twelve  or  fourteen  of  the  ringleaders,  about  the  mid- 
dle of  the  night,  massacred  the  principal  managers  of  the  plan- 
tation ;  whence  ihey  proceeded  to  the  house  of  a  Mr.  Clement, 
by  whose  negroes  also  they  were  immediately  joined,  and  both 
he  and  his  refiner  were  massacred. 

Similar  tragedies  were  peiformed  on  the  plantations  of  M. 
Galifet  and  M.  Flaville,  with  circumstances  of  barbarity  how- 
ever indefensible  and  terrible,  such  as  an  infuriated  people 
were  likely  to  practice.  It  was  soon  evident  that  the  negroes 
acted  in  concert,  a  general  massacre  of  the  whites  was  the 
consequence,,  with  the  exception  only,  on  a  few  estates,  of 
the    women,    who  were    spared  for  a  severer  fate. 

Consternation  !H)w  every  where  prevailed,  and  the  screams 
of  the  women  and  children,  running  from  door  to  door,  heigh- 
tened the  horrors  of  the  scene.  The  citizens  took  up  arms,  and 
the  general  assembly  vested  the  governor  with  the  command  of 
the  national  guards.  The  women  and  children  were  sent  on 
board  the  ships  in  the  harbour;   and  most  of  the  ablest  men 


REVOLT    OF    THE    NEGROES.  85 

among  the  domestic  negroes  in  ihe  town,  were  sent  on  ship- 
board under  a  strong  guard.  Still,  however,  there  remained  a 
considerable  body  of  free  mulattoes,  whose  situation  became 
critical ;  for  the  lower  class  of  whites,  considering  the  mulattoes 
as  the  authors  of  the  rebellion,  marked  them  for  destruction; 
and  they  would  undoubtedly  have  been  murdered,  if  the  gover- 
nor and  the  colonial  a^^sembly  had  not  taken  them  under  their 
protection.  Upon  this,  they  otfered  to  march  against  the  rebels, 
leaving  their  wives  and  children  as  hostages  for  their  fidelity. 
Their  offer  was  accepted,  and  they  were  enrolled  in  the  militia. 

The  inhabitants  being  strengthened  by  a  numbt-r  of  seamen 
from  the  ships,  and  brought  into  some  degree  of  military  order, 
M.  de  Touzard,  who  had  distinguished  himself  in  the  service  of 
the  North  Americans,  took  the  command  of  a  parly  of  militia 
and  troops  of  the  line,  and  marched  to  the  plantation  of  a  M. 
Latour,  where  he  attacked  a  body  of  about  four  thousand  of  the 
rebel  negroes.  But  though  many  were  destroyed,  Touzard 
found  their  numbers  so  constantly  renewed  and  increased,  that 
he  was  at  length  obliged  to  retreat,  and  thus  expose  the  town  to 
the  destruction  which  more  skilful  enemies  would  at  that  mo- 
ment have  easily  accomplished. 

At  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  town,  the  main  road  from  the 
plain  is  intersected  by  a  river,  which  was  crossed  in  ferry  boats. 
To  defend  this  passage,  a  battery  of  cannon  was  raised  on  boats 
lashed  together  ;  while  two  small  camps  were  formed  on  the 
banks.  The  other  principal  road,  towards  the  south,  was  through 
a  mountainous  district,  called  le  Haut  du  Cap,  which  was  imme- 
diately occupied  by  bodies  of  troops,  with  such  artillery  as  could 
be  spared,  while  a  strong  pallisade  and  chevaux  de  frize,  in  the 
erecting  of  which  all  the  inhabitants  laboured,  encompassed  the 
place  on  the  land  side.  At  the  same  time,  an  embargo  was  laid 
on  all  the  shipping  in  the  harbour. 

Notice  of  the  revolt  had  been  transmitted  to  the  different  pa- 
rishes as  quickly  as  possible,  and  the  white  inhabitants  of  many,  of 
them  had  found  time  to  establish  camps,  and  form  a  chain  of  posts, 
which  for  a  short  time  seemed  to  check  the  revolt ;  but  two  of 
those  camps  at  Grande  Kiviere,  and  at  Dondon,  were  attacked 


86  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

by  the  negroes,  in  conjunction  with  the  mulattoes,  and  forced 
with  great  slaughter.  These  two  districts  therefore;  the  whole 
of  the  rich  and  extensive  plain  of  the  Cape,  together  with  the 
contigiU)Us  mountains,  were  now  wholly  abandoned  to  the  ene- 
my, whose  cruelties  were  not  sparingly  exercised,  on  such  of 
the  miserable  whites  as  fell  into  their  liands. 

Over  particular  instances  which  shock  humanity,  it  is  best  per- 
haps to  draw  the   veil  of  concealment,  and  rather  to  adopt  the 
more  agreeable  plan   of  selecting  one  of  extraordinary  fidelity 
and   attachment  in  a  negro,   related  by  Mr.  Edwards.     Mons, 
and  Madame  Baillon,  their  daughter  and  son-in-law,  and  two 
white  servants,  residing  on  a  mountain   plantation  about  thirty 
miles  from  Cape  Francois,  were  apprised  of  the  revolt  by  one  of 
their  own  slaves,  who  was  himself  in  the  conspiracy,  but  prom- 
ised if  possible,  to  save  the  lives  of  his  master  and  his  family. 
Having  no  immediate   means  of  providing  for  their  escape,  he 
conducted  them  into  an  adjacent  wood  ;  after  which  he   went 
and  joined  the  revolters.     The  following  night,  he  found  an  op- 
portunity of  bjin^ing  them  provisions  from   the   rebel  camp. 
The  second,  night   he  returned   again,  with  a  further  supply  of 
provisions  :  but  declared   that  it  would  be  out  of  his  power  to 
give  them  iiny  further  assistance.      After  this,  they  saw  nothing 
of  the   negro    for  three    days  ;  but  at  the  end  of  that  time  he 
came  again,  and  directed  the  family  how  to  make  their  way  to 
a  river  which  led  to  Port  Margot,  assuring  them  they  would  find 
a  canoe,  on  a  pait  of  the  river  which  he  described.     They  fol- 
lowed his  directions;  fjund  the  canoe,  and  got  safely   into  it; 
but  were  overset  by  the  rapidity  of  the  current,  and  after  a  nar- 
row escape,   thought  it  best  to   return  to   their  retreat  in  the 
mouiitains.     The  negro,   anxious  for  their  safety,  again   found 
them  out,  and   directed  them  to  a  broader  part  of  the  river, 
where  he  assured  them  he  had  provided  a  boat;  but  said  it  was 
the  last  effort  he  could  make  to  save  them.     They  went  accor- 
dingly, but  not  finding  the    boat,  gave  theroselves  up  for  lost, 
when  the  faithful  negro  again  appeared  like  the  guardian  angel. 
He  brought  with  him  pigeojos,  poultry,  and  bread  ;  and  conduc- 
ted the  famil)  by  slow  marcfies  in  the  night,  along  the  banks  of 


REVOLT    IN    THE    WEST.  81 

the  river,  until  they  were  within  sight  of  the  wharf  at  Port 
Margot;  when  telling  them  they  were  entirely  out  of  danger, 
he  took  his  leave  for  ever,  and  went  to  join  the  rebels.  The 
family  were  in  the  woods  nineteen  nights. 

The  town  of  the  Cape  being  at  length  placed  in  a  defensive 
position,  a  small  army,  under  the  command  of  M.  Rouvray, 
was  sent  to  the  eastern  part  of  the  plain,  and  encamped  at  a 
place  called  Roiicrou.  A  considerable  body  of  the  negroes 
took  possession  at  the  same  time,  of  the  large  buildings  on  the 
plantation  of  M.  Gallifet,  and  mounted  some  heavy  pieces  of 
artillery,  which  they  had  procured  at  different  shipping  places 
and  harbours  along  the  coast.  From  this  plantation  they  sent 
out  foraging  parties,  with  which  the  whites  had  frequent  skir- 
mishes. The  negroes  seldom  stood  their  ground  longer  than  to 
receive  and  return  a  single  volley  ;  as  soon  as  one  body  was  cut 
off.  another  app»^ared,  and  thus  they  succeeded  in  harassing  the 
whites,  and  spreading  desolation  in  every  quarter. 

In  this  terrible  war,  human  blood  was  poured  forth  in  torrents. 
It  was  computed  that,  within  two  months  after  the  revolt  first 
began,  upwards  of  two  thousand  white  persons  of  all  conditions 
and  ages,  had  been  massacred  ; — that  one  burrdred  and  eighty 
su2;ar  plantations,  and  about  nine  hundred  coffee,  cotton,  and 
indigo  settlements  had  been  destroyed  (the  buildings  thereon 
being  consumed  by  fire,)  and  one  thousand  two  hundred  chris- 
tian families  reduced  from  opulence,  to  such  a  state  of  misery,  as 
to  depend  altogether  for  their  clothing  and  sustenance  on  public 
and  private  charity.  Of  the  insurgents,  it  was  reckoned  that  up- 
wards of  tfn  thousand  had  perished  by  the  sword  or  by  famine; 
and  some  hundreds  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner. 

The  rebellion  hitherto  chiefly  confined  to  the  northern  pro- 
rince,  soon  began  to  break  forth  in  the  west,  where  the  insur- 
gents were  chiefly  men  of  colour,  of  whom  upwards  of  two 
thousand  appeared  in  arms  in  the  parish  of  Mirebalais.  These 
were  joined  by  six  hundred  negro  slaves,  who  began  their  ope- 
rations by  burning  the  coffee  plantations  in  the  mountains  adja- 
cent to  the  plain  of  Cul-de-Sac.  Detachments  sent  against 
them  from  Port-au-Price,  were  repulsed  ;  and  they  continued  to 


89  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMIiNGO. 

ravage  and  burn  the  country  thniugh  an  extent  of  thirty  miles. 
At  length  they  approached  Port-au-Prince,  with  intention  of 
setting  it  on  fire ;  and  its  destruction  seemed  inevitable,  when 
some  of  the  mulattoe  chiefs  finding  that  their  attempts  to  gain 
over  the  negro  slaves  were  not  so  successful  as  they  expected, 
intimated  that  they  were  not  averse  to  a  reconciliation.  And 
M.  de  Jumecourt,  a  planter  of  eminence,  procured  by  a  \yeli- 
timed  interposition,  a  treaty  called  the  concordat,  which  was 
agreed  upon  about  the  eleventh  of  September,  between  th  e 
free  people  of  colour,  and  the  white  inhabitants  of  Port-au-Prince. 
The  chief  provisions  were,  an  amnesty  for  the  past,  and  an  en- 
gagement to  admit  in  full  force  the  national  decree  of  the  fifteenth 
of  May.  The  general  assrembly,  by  a  proclamation  of  the  twen- 
tieth of  September,  declared  their  ratification  of  this  agreement, 
and  announced  an  inttnlion  to  grant  considei able  indulgtnies 
towards  such  free  people  of  colour  as  were  nut  comprehended 
in  it,  meaning  those  who  were  born  of  enslaved  parents.  They 
voted  at  the  same  time  the  formation  of  certain  free  companies 
of  mulattoes,  wherein  the  men  of  colour  of  all  descriptions,  pos- 
sessed of  certain  qualifications,  should  be  allowed  to  serve  as 
commissioned  officers.  But  these  concessions  came  too  late, 
and  the  flames  only  smothered,  soon  broke  forth  again  with  in- 
creased fury. 

It  was  singular  enough,  that  almost  at  the  very  moment  when 
the  justice  and  necessity  of  the  obnoxious  decree  of  the  fifteenth 
of  May  were  acknowledged,  and  its  faithful  observance  prom- 
ised by  the  colonial  assembly,  its  repeal  vva§  actually  voted  by 
the  national  legislature  in  the  mother  country  by  a  large  ma- 
joiity. 

No  sooner  was  authentic  information  received  in  St.  Domingo 
of  this  repeal,  than  every  hope  of  concord  for  ever  vanished. 
The  mulattoes  could  not  believe  that  the  planters  in  the  colony 
were  ignorant  of  the  transaction  ;  and  so  great  was  their  detesta- 
tion of  this  supposed  treachery,  that  they  scrupled  not  to  declare 
that  one  party  or  the  other,  themselves  or  the  whiles,  must  be 
exterminated.  In  this  disposition,  the  western  and  southern 
provinces  flew  to  arms.     Port  St.  Louis  was  taken ;  but  Port- 


MUTUAL    VIOLENCE.  89 

au-Pilnce  having  been  lately  reinforced  by  some  troops  from 
Europe,  the  revolters  were  driven  from  the  city  with  great 
slaughter,  but  nevertheless  found  means  to  destroy  more  than 
one-third  of  the  city  by  fire. 

The  contest  now  assumed  a  diabolical  character  :  each  -party 
endeavoured  to  excel  in  the  infliction  of  cruelties.  The  negroes 
in  many  places  joined  the  mulattoes,  and  in  the  district  called 
Cul  de  5?ac,  in  a  sanguinary  engagement,  by  being  ranged  in 
front,  and  acting  without  discipline,  two  thousand  of  their  num- 
ber were  left  dead  on  the  field.  The  whites  claimed  the  vic- 
tory, which,  if  it  were  obtained,  their  want  of  cavalry  render- 
ed them  unable  to  improve.  Each  party  seemed  anxious  to 
outdo  the  other  in  cruelty  ;  and  on  both  sides,  whatever  priso- 
ners could  be  obtained,  were  subjected  to  the  most  barbarous 
executions. 

About  the  middle  of  December,  three  civil  commissioners, 
nominated  by  the  National  Assembly,  to  restore  peace  apd  su- 
bordination in  St.  Domingo,  arrived  at  Cape  Francois-  Two 
of  them,  Mirbeck  and  Roome,  had  been  known  as  advocates 
in  the  parliaments  of  Paris  ;  and  the  third,  St.  Leger,  a  native 
of  Ireland,  had  practised  many  years  in  France  as  a  surgeon. 
They  were  received  with  respect  and  submission;  military  ho- 
nours were  shown  them,  and  they  were  led  in  public  procession 
to  the  cathedral,  where  prayers  were  presented.  After  announc- 
ing the  new  French  constitution,  they  published  the  decree  of  the 
twenty-fourth  of  September,  1791,  by  which  the  fatal  decree  of 
the  fifteenth  of  May  was  annulled.  In  a  few  days,  they  took  upon 
themselves  to  proclaim  a  general  amnesty  and  pardon  to  all 
who  should  lay  down  their  arms,  and  within  a  prescribed  time, 
take  the  oaths  required  by  the  new  constitution.  This  measure 
lost  the Ql*»'the  confidence  both  of  the  white  inhabitants  and  the 
mulattoes  ;  by  the  former,  it  was  considered  as  a  justification  of 
the  most  horrible  enormities,  and  as  holdin-  out  a  dangerous 
example  to  such  of  the  negroes  as  preserved  their  fidelity ;  and 
the  latter  disliked  it  on  account  of  its  bting  accompanied  with  a 
repeal  of  their  favourite  decree. 

The  indefinite  authority  claimed  by  the  commissioners,  exci- 

13 


90  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

• 
ted  considerable  alarm  in  the  colonial  assembly,  who  desired  to 

know  the  nature  and  extent  of  their  powers  :  but  no  satisfactory 
answer  being  given,  the  commissioners  sunk  into  disrepute. 
Their  private  conduct  was  besides  calculated  to  lower  them  in 
public  opinion.  Roome  indeed  was  an  inoffensive  individual, 
but  destitute  of  the  requisite  abilities ;  so  that  in  a  short  time, 
having  no  troops  tosuppoit  their  authority,  they  returned  sepa- 
rately to  France  in  the  months  of  March  and  April. 

Public  affairs  in  France  were  now  hastening  to  a  great  crisis,  and 
predicted  important  changes.  Since  the  flight  and  seizure  of  the 
king,  in  June  1791,  the  faction  was  hourly  increasing  iti  num- 
bers which  was  soon  to  lay  the  kingdom  in  ruins^  and  bring  the 
monarch  himself  to  the  scaffold.  The  Jacobin  party  was  becom- 
ing all-powerful ;  and  the  society  of  ^ mis  des  Aoirs  had  once 
more  acquired  an  ascendency  in  the  legislative  body  On  the 
twenty-ninth  of  February,  Garan  de  Coulon,  after  haranguing 
against  the  planters  in  g(-neral,  proposed  the  form  of  a  decree 
for  abrogating  that  of  the  twenty  fourth  of  September,  declaring 
a  general  amnesty  throughout  all  the  French  colonies;  and  en- 
acting, that  new  colonial  assemblies  should  be  funned,  to  trans- 
mit their  sentiments  not  only  on  the  subject  of  the  internal 
government  of  the  colonies,  but  also  on  the  best  method  of  effecting 
the  abolition  of  negro  slavery  in  toto.  A  majority  could  not  at 
this  time  be  found  to  vote  fur  this  proposition;  but  in  about  two 
months,  this  assembly  passed  the  famous  decree  of  the  fourth 
of  April,  1792,  of  which  the  following  is  a  copy. 

The  national  assembly  acknowledges  and  declares,  that  the 
people  of  colour  and  free  negroes  in  the  colonies  ought  to  enjoy 
an  equality  of  political  rights  with  the  whites ;  in  consequence 
of  which  it  decrees  as  follows  : — 

Article  1st.  Immediately  after  the  publication  of  tfee  present 
decree,  the  inhabitants  of  each  of  the  French  colonies  in  the 
Windward  and  Leeward  Islands  shall  proceed  to  the  re-election 
of  colonial  and  parochial  assemblies  after  the  mode  prescribed 
by  the  decree  of  the  eighth  of  March  1790,  and  the  instructions 
of  the  national  assembly  of  the  twenty-eighth  of  the  same  month. 

2d.     The  people  of  oolour  and  free  negroes  shall  be  admitted 


DECREE  OF  APRIL  4,  1792.  91 

to  vote  in  all  the  primary  and  electoral  sssemblies,  and  shall  be 
eligible  to  the  legislature  and  all  places  of  trust,  provided  they 
possess  the  qualifications  prescribed  by  the  4th  article  of  the 
aforesaid  instructions. 

3d.  Three  civil  commissioners  shall  be  named  for  the  colony 
of  St.  Domingo,  and  four  for  the  islands  of  Martinico,  Guada- 
Imipe,  St.  Lucia,  and  Tobago,  to  see  this  decree  enforced. 

4th.  The  said  commissioners  shall  be  authorized  to  dissolve 
the  present  colonial  assemblies;  to  take  every  measure  neces- 
sary for  accelerating  the  convocation  of  the  primary  and  electo- 
ral assemblies,  and  therein  to  establish  union,  order,  and  peace  : 
as  well  as  to  determine  provisionally  (reserving  the  power  of  ap- 
peal to  the  national  assembly)  upon  every  question  which  may 
arise  concerning  the  regularity  of  convocations,  the  holding  of 
assemblies,  the  form  of  elections,  and  the  eligibility  of  citizens. 

5th.  They  are  also  authorized  to  procure  every  information 
possible,  in  order  to  discover  the  authors  of  the  troubles  in  St. 
Domingo,  and  the  continuance  thereof,  if  they  still  continue ;  to 
secure  the  persons  of  the  guilty,  and  to  send  them  over  to  France, 
there  to  be  put  in  a  state  of  accusation,  &c. 

6th.  The  said  civil  commissioners  shall  be  directed  for  this 
purpose,  to  transmit  to  the  national  assembly,  minutes  of  their 
proceedings,  and  of  the  evidence  they  may  have  collected  con- 
cerning the  persons  accused  as  aforesaid. 

7ih.  The  national  assembly  authorizes  the  civil  commission- 
ers to  call  forth  the  public  force  whenever  they  may  think  it 
necessary,  either  for  their  own  protection,  or  for  the  execution 
of  such  orders  as  they  may  issue  by  virtue  of  the  preceding 
articles. 

Sth.  The.  executive  power  is  directed  to  send  a  sufficient 
force  to  the  colonies,  to  be  composed  chiefly  of  national  guards. 

9tii.  The  colonial  assemblies,  immediately  after  their  for- 
mation, shall  signify,  in  the  name  of  each  colony  respectively, 
their  sentiments  respecting  that  constitution,  those  laws,  and  the 
administration  of  them,  which  will  best  promote  the  prosperity 
and  happiness  of  the  people  ;  conforming  themselves  neverthe- 
less to  those  general  principles  by  which  the   colonies  and 


d2  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

mother  country  are  connected  together,  and  by  which  their 
respective  interests  are  best  secured,  agreeably  to  the  decree  of 
the  8th  of  March,  1790,  and  instructions  of  the  23th  of  the  same 
month. 

10th.  The  colonial  assemblies  are  authorized  to  send  home 
delegates  for  the  purposes  mentioned  in  the  preceding  article, 
in  numbers  proportionate  to  the  population  of  each  colony, 
which  proportion  shall  be  forthwith  determined  by  the  national 
assembly,  according  to  the  report  which  its  colonial  committee 
is  directed  to  make. 

Uih.  Former  decrees  respecting  the  colonies  shall  be  in 
force  in  every  thing  not  contrary  to  the  present  decree. 

The  new  commissioners  nominated  for  St.  Domingo,  were 
Messrs.  Sanlhonax,  Polverel,  and  Ailhaud,  and  it  was  resolved 
to  fdfrfiish  thf'm  with  a  sufficient  force  to  establish  their  authori- 
ty, and  speedily  terminate  the  existing  disturbances.  Eight 
thousand  men  were  carefully  selected  from  the  national  guards, 
with  officers  whose  principles  were  well  known  to  their  employ- 
ers. M.  Bl^inchelande  was  recalled,  and  a  new  commission  of 
commander-in-chief  given  to  a  Mons.  Desparbes.  Having  land- 
ed at  Cape  Francois  on  the  thirteenth  of  September,  and  finding 
M.  Blanchelande  at  variance  with  the  colonial  assenjblv,  the 
commissioners  instantly  dissolved  the  assembly,  and  sent  the 
governor  a  slate  piisoner  to  France,  where,  on  the  seventh  of 
April,  1793,  he  suffered  on  the  guillotine. 

The  colony  was  now  thrown  into  a  state  of  extreme  terror : 
suspicions  having  arisen  respecting  the  design  afterwards  avowed, 
of  declaring  a  general  einancipation  of  the  negro  slaves,  which 
all  parties  concurred  in  reprobating.  The  commissioners  deem- 
ed it  necessary  to  dissemble  ;  and  accordingly  stated  that  their 
views  extended  no  further  than  to  see  the  decree  of  the  fourth 
of  April,  in  favour  of  the  free  people  of  colour,  properly  enforc- 
ed ;  to  reduce  the  rebellious  slaves  to  obedience,  and  to  settle 
the  government  of  the  colony  on  a  solid  foundation.  The  white 
inhabitants,  however,  soon  perceived  that  the  commissioners 
held  secret  communications  with  the  cliiefs  of  the  mulatloes  in 
all  parts  of  the  colony,  and  they  soon  avowed  themselves  openly 


M.    GALBAUD    APPOINTED    GOVERNOR.  93 

the  protectors  of  the  free  negroes  and  inulattoes,  seizing  the 
persons  and  effects  of  all  who  opposed  their  proceedings,  and 
sending  them  in  a  state  of  arrest  to  Europe.  Among  the  per- 
sons thus  transported,  were  the  superior  oflBcers  of  the  Cape 
regiment. 

The  white  inhabitants  now  demanded  the  election  of  a  new 
colonial  assembly,  bat  the  commissioners,  instead  of  complying 
with  their  wishes,  instituted  what  was  called  nne  commission  in- 
termediaire,  consisting  of  twelve  persons,  six  of  whom  bad  been 
members  of  the  last  assembly,  and  ?ix  mulaltoes;  their  comng^s- 
sion  extended  chiefly  to  financial  objects.  Meanwhile,  Despar- 
bes,  complaining  of  the  disrefrard  with  which  his  authority  was 
treated,  was  sent  after  his  predecessor  as  a  state  prii^oner  to 
France.  Four  out  of  the  six  white  members  of  the  commission 
intermedimre,  were  served  in  the  same  manner.  Having  ventur- 
ed to  offer  their  opinion  on  a  measure  of  finance,  in  opposition 
to  that  of  M.  Santhonax,  he  treacherously  seized  theni  at  a  sup- 
per to  which  they  were  invited ;  and  exchanged  the  room  of 
festivity  for  the  hold  of  a  ship.  After  this,  the  commissioners 
disagreed  among  themselves,  and  Santhonax  and  Polverel  hav- 
ing got  rid  of  Alihaud,  bestov-'ed  largesses  on  the  troops,  and 
by  this  and  other  means,  became  in  the  beginning  of  the  year 
1793,  absolute  masters  of  the  colony.  The  lives  and  property 
of  tlie  white  inhabitants  were  at  their  unmerciful  disposal,  and 
no  other  melioration  of  their  condition  was  obtained  than  the 
appointment  of  M.  Galbaud,  an  c»fficer  of  artillery  and  a  man  of 
good  reputation,  as  governor.  He  was  sent  in  one  of  the  nation- 
al frigates  with  orders  to  put  the  colony  into  the  best  possible 
state  of  defence,  war  having  been  proclaimed  against  Great  Bri- 
tain and  Holland. 

At  the  period  of  Galbaud's  arrival,  in  May,  1793,  the  civil 
commissioners  were  in  the  western  province,  endeavouring  to 
quell  an  insurrection,  so  that  Galbaud  was  received  with  accla- 
mations and  submission  by  the  municipality  of  the  town  of  the 
Cape  ;  he  took  the  necessary  oaths,  and  entered  on  his  govern- 
ment. 

In  June,  the  civil  commissionersj  having  reduced  Fort-au- 


94  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

Prince  and  Jacinel,  returned  ;  when  a  serious  altercation  took 
place,  highly  disadvantageous  to  the  gf)vernor.  By  a  decree  of 
the  national  assembly,  that  no  proprietor  of,  an  estate  in  the 
West  Indies  should  hold  the  government  of  a  colony  wherein 
his  estate  was  situated,  M.  Galbaud,  who  had  a  coffee  planta- 
tion in  St.  Domingo,  was  dispossessed  of  his  new  office,  and  or- 
dered instantly  to  embark  on  board  of  the  sloop  of  war  La  Nor- 
mande,  and  return  to  France ;  while  Mons.  de  la  Salle,  who 
commanded  Port-au-Prince,  was  invested  with  the  superinten- 
dence of  the  colony. 

Galbaud's  brother,  a  man  of  spirit  and  enterprize,  could  not 
submit  to  these  proceedings;  and  accordingly  collected  from 
among  the  inhabitants,  the  Cape  militia,  and  the  seamen  in  the 
harbour,  a  strong  party  to  support  the  governor's  authority.  In 
seven  days,  the  two  brothers  landed  at  the  head  of  one  thousand 
two  hundred  sailors,  and  being  joined  by  a  considerable  body 
of  volunteers,  immediately  marched  in  array  towards  the  govern- 
ment house,  in  which  the  commissioners  were  stationed.  The 
latter  were  defended  by  the  people  of  colour,  a  body  of  regu- 
lars, and  one  piece  of  cannon.  The  conflict  was  fierce  and 
bloody.  The  volunteers  manifested  great  firmness  but  the  sea- 
men getting  possession  of  a  wine  cellar,  soon  became  intoxica- 
ted and  ungovernable ;  and  the  column  was  obliged  to  retire  to 
the  royal  arsenal,  where  they  remained  the  ensuing  night  unmo- 
lested. Many  skirmishes  took  place  the  next  day  in  the  streets, 
with  various  success;  in  one  of  which  Galbaud's  brother  was 
taken  prisoner  by  the  commissioner's  troops,  and  in  another  the 
seamen  that  were  fighting  on  the  part  of  Galbaud,  made  captive 
Polverel's  son.  The  governor  sent  a  flag  proposing  to  exchange 
the  commissioner's  son  for  his  brother ;  but  Polverel  rejected 
the  proposal  with  indignation  ;  declaring  in  answer,  that  his  son 
knew  bis  duly,  and  was  prepared  to  die  in  the  service  of  the 
republic. 

A  scene  of  horror  now  presents  itself  When  Galbaud  first 
approached  with  so  large  a  body  of  seamen,  the  commissioners 
dispatched  agents  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  the  revolted  ne- 
groes ;  offering  them  an  unconditional  pardon  for  the  past,  per- 


CITY  OF   CAPE  FRAN9OIS  BURNT.  95 

feet  freedom  in  future,  and  the  plunder  of  the  city.  These  of- 
fers were  rejected  by  the  rebel  generals,  Jean  Fran9ois  and  Bi- 
assou,  till  the  twenty-first,  when  a  negro  chief,  called  Macaya, 
with  upwards  of  three  thousand  of  the  revolted  slaves,  entered 
the  town,  and  began  an  indiscriminate  slaughter  of  men,  women 
and  children.  The  white  inhabitants  fled  to  the  sea  side,  in 
quest  of  protection  with  the  governor  on  board  the  ships;  but 
their  retreat  being  intercepted  by  a  body  of  the  mulattoes.  a 
dreadful  butchery  ensued-  All  the  white  inhabitants  that  could 
be  found  were  muidered,  and  more  than  half  the  city  was  con- 
sumed. The  commissioners  themselves  were  terrified  and  sought 
protection  under  cover  of  a  ship  of  the  line  :  whence  they  view- 
ed with  dismay  the  wide  spreading  mischief. 


CHAP.  VI. 

FROM   MIDSUMMER,    1793,  TO  THE    EVACUATION    OF    THE  ISLAND 
BY  THE  BRITISH  TROOPS  IN    1798. 

Emigrations. —  Overtures  to  the  British  government. — Strength  of  the 
Republican  party. — Negro  slavery  abolished  by  the  French  commis- 
sioners.— Jeremie  and  the  Mole  at  Cape  St.  Nicholas  surrendered  to 
the  British. — Failure  of  attack  on  Cape  Tiburon. — A  second  attempt 
succeeds. — Further  operations  of  the  British  troops. — Reinforce- 
ments under  General  Whyte. — Conquest  of  Fort-au- Prince. — Fur- 
ther reinforcements. — Great  mortality  anvmg  the  troops.  -  General 
Whyte  succeeded  by  Brigadier  General  Honieck.—Leogane  taken 
by  tJte  negroes. — Successes  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Brisbane  in  Arti- 
honite. — Insurrection  of  mvlattoes  at  St.  Marc. — Rigaud  attacks 
Fort  Bizolton — takes  Fort  Tiburon. —Conspiracy  of  the  French 
against  the  British  at  St.  Marc,  and  at  Port-au-Prince.— Lieutenant 
Colonels  Brisbane  and  Markham  killed. — British  reinforcements  — 
Ravages  of  disease. — Major  General  Williamson,  Cojnmander  in 
Chief,  succeeded  by  Major  General  Forbes. — The  Spanish  part  of 
St.  Domingo  ceded  to  the  French  Republic. — Reinforcements  under 
Brigadier  General  Howe. — Leogane  fortified  by  the  midattoes. — 
Major  General  Simcoe  succeeds  to  the  chief  command. — Toussaint 
appointed  by  the  French  government  General  in  Chief. — General 
Whyte  succeeds  Genercd  Simcoe,  and  is  soon  succeeded  by  Briga- 
dier General  Maitland. — St.  Domingo  wholly  evacuated  by  the 
British  ti'oops. 

From  the  period  of  the  revolt  of  the  negroes  in  the  northern 
province,  numerous  emigrations  had  taken  place  from  St.  Do- 
inuigo  to  the  neighbouring  islands,  and  not  less  than  ten  thou- 
sand were  supposed  to  have  passed  over  to  the  continent  of 
America.  Among  these  is  to  be  reckoned  M,  Galbaud,  who 
was  accompanied  by  many  respectable  families.  The  principal 
planters  bad  repaired  to  Great  Britain,  many  of  whom  had  pre- 


NEGRO  SLAVERY  ABOLISHED.  9f 

viously  applied  to  the  king's  ministers  for  an  armament  to  take 
possession  of  the  country  for  Great  Britain.  Their  representa- 
tions were  at  first  disregarded  ;  but  at  length,  after  the  com- 
mencement of  hostilities  between  Great  Britain  and  Fiance, 
the  English  ministry  listened  to  the  overtures  again  made  to 
them,  by  the  planters  of  St.  Domingo;  and  in  1793,  M  Char- 
milly,  one  of  their  number,  received  dispatches  from  the  secre- 
tary of  state  to  General  Williamson,  the  governor  of  Jamaica, 
intimating  the  king's  pleasure  that  he  should  accept  the  sub- 
mission of  those  inhabitants  who  solicited  the  protection  of  the 
British  government ;  for  which  purpose  he  was  to  send  a  suffi- 
cient force  to  hold  possession  of  whatever  places  might  be  sur- 
rendered. 

The  French  commissioners.  Santhonax  and  Polverel,  had 
brought  from  France  six  thousand  chosen  troops  ;  which,  with 
the  national  force  already  in  the  colony,  and  the  militia  of  the 
country,  constituted  a  body  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  thousand  effec- 
tive whites ;  and  to  these  were  joined  the  greatest  part  of  the 
free  negroes  and  mulattoes,  besides  a  motley  band,  consisting 
chiefly  of  slaves  who  had  deserted  from  their  owners,  and  ne- 
groes collected  from  the  jails,  amounting  altogether  to  twenty- 
five  thousand  effectives,  well  arnied  and  inured  to  the  clirnate. 
Being  however  dispersed,  they  were  less  formidable,  of  which 
the  commissioners  were  fully  sensible,  and  accordingly  on  the 
first  intimation  of  an  attack  from  the  Knglisb,  they  attempted  to 
strengthen  their  interest  by  proclaiming  the  abolition  of  every 
species  of  slavery,  declaring  that  the  negroes  were  thenceforth 
to  be  considered  as  free  citizens.  Numbers  in  all  parts  of  the 
colony  availed  themselves  of  this  offer  of  liberty,  and  withdraw- 
ing to  the  mountains,  possessed  themselves  of  the  natural  fast- 
nesses in  the  interior.  Upv.ards  of  one  hundred  thousand  are 
supposed  to  have  formed  themselves  in  this  manner  into  a  savage 
republic,  resembling  that  of  the  black  Charaibes  of  St.  Vincent. 

In  the  northern  province,  a  desperate  band  of  revolted  ne- 
groes, amounting,  as  it  was  supposed,  to  upwards  of  forty  thou- 
sand, still  continued  in  arms. 

The  armament  formed  at  Jamaica  amounted  to  about  eight 

14 


98  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

hundred  and  seventy  rank  and  file,  of  which  the  first  division, 
consisiing  ofsix  hundred  and  seventy-seven  rank  and  file,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Whilelocke,  sailed  from 
Port  Royal  the  9th,  and  arrived  at  Jereuiie,  on  the  I9th  of 
September,  accompanied  by  Commodore  Ford,  in  the  Europa, 
and  four  or  five  frigates.  The  terms  of  capitulation  having 
been  previously  adjusted,  the  Biitish  forces  had  only  to  take 
possession  of  the  town  and  iiarbour,  which  was  done  next  morn- 
ing; the  oaths  of  fidelity  and  allegiance  being  taken  by  the  in- 
habitants with  great  apparent  readiness  and  satisfaction.  On  the 
22;l5  the  fortress  and  haiboui  at  Cape  St.  Nicholas  were  occu- 
pied, the  grenadier  conjpany  of  the  I3lh  regiment  taking  the 
command  of  the  garrison,  which  was  soon  afterwards  strength- 
ened by  the  second  division  from  Jamaica.  The  town  of  St. 
Nicholas,  however,  continued  hostile ;  most  of  the  inhabitants 
joined  the  republican  army  :  in  fact,  the  whole  of  what  had 
hitherto  been  acconjpli-hed  was  but  an  insignificant  acquisition, 
although  from  tife  extent  of  the  subjected  coast,  the  people  of 
England  glowed  with  high  expectation  of  the  result.  It  having 
been  represented  to  Colonel  VVhitelocke  that  the  acquisition  of 
Tiburon  would  prove  important  to  the  security  of  Le  Grand 
Ance,  and  a  M.  Duval,  a  planter,  pledging  himself  to  co-operate 
in  its  reduction  wiib  five  hundred  colonial  troops;  the  British 
force  proceeded  from  Jeremie,  and  arrived  in  Tiburon  Bay  on 
the  4th  of  October.  But  the  expedition  completely  failed,  ei- 
ther through  untoward  circumstances,  or  as  some  have  repre- 
sented, in  consequence  of  the  infideliiy  of  the  Fiench  to  their 
promises.  The  enemy  were  more  formidable  than  was  antici- 
pated, and  the  invaders  retreated  with  the  loss  of  about  twenty 
inen  killed  and  w^ounded.  This  proved  an  extreme  discourage- 
ment to  the  troops,  among  whom,  in  consequence  of  unusual 
fatigue  in  an  unfavorable  climate,  sickness  began  to  make  its 
appearance  to  an  alarming  degree.  .  The  general  used  his  ut- 
most endeavours  to  revive  their  spirits  by  sendit>g,  though  they 
could  be  ill  spared,  the  remaining  pait  of  the  49th  regiment, 
the  20lh,  and  the  Royals,  amounting  altogether  to  seven  or 
eight  hundred  men,  as  a  reinforcement,  till  further  assistance 


M.  LAVAUX   REFUSES  A  BRIBE.  99 

should  be  obtained  from  England.  This  measure  produced  a 
considerable  effect  among  the  French  planters,  and  in  the  be- 
ginning of  December,  the  parishes  of  Jean  Rabel,  St.  Marc, 
Arcahaye,  and  Boucassin,  surrendered  on  the  sa-ne  conditions 
as  had  been  granted  to  Jereujie  :  the  example  was  soon  follow- 
ed by  the  inhabitants  of  Leogane,  Nothing  more  was  attempted 
till  the  ensuing  year  :  when  the  squadron  arrived  off  Cape  Ti- 
buron  on  the  evening  of  the  2d  of  February,  for  the  purpose  of 
renewing  the  attack  and  retrieving  the  former  failure,  the  ene- 
my appeared  in  force,  and  deliberately  waited  the  arrival  of  the 
British  ;  but  the  fire  of  the  ships  soon  cleared  the  bt  ach  :  they 
came  forward  again,  and  discharged  their  musquetry  at  the 
boats.  The  troops  however  landed,  and  instantly  forming,  with 
Major  Spencer  at  their  head,  routed  their  line  with  great 
slaughter,  and  immediately  took  possession  of  the  post.  Three 
only  of  the  English  were  killed,  and  seven  wounded.  Of  the 
enemy,  one  hundred  and  fifty  surrendered  prisoners  of  war. 
The  magazines  were  found  well  stored  with  ammunition. 

The  British  squadron  now  commanded  the  navigation  of  the 
whole  of  that  extensive  bay  which  forms  the  Bight  of  Leogane  ; 
and  on  the  arrival  of  a  large  armament  now  daily  and  anxiously 
expected  from  England,  Port-au-Prince  was  regarded  as  a  cer- 
tain conquest.  It  was.deemed  important  in  the  mean  while,  to 
obtain  the  town  of  Port  Paix,  an  important  station  to  the  east- 
ward of  Cape  St.  Nicholas,  by  the  offer  of  the  sum  of  five  thou- 
sand pounds,  to  M.  Lavaux,  an  old  general  in  the  French  ser- 
vice, and  a  man  both  of  bravery  and  probity,  to  whom  Colonel 
^\hitelocke  addressed  himself  by  letter.  Lavaux,  having  silent- 
ly read  it,  de^nanded  of  the  officer  who  conveyed  it,  upon  the 
honour  of  a  soldier,  if  he  knew  the  contents.  The  officer  an- 
swered in  the  negative.  The  French  general  then  read  the 
letter  aloud  to  the  people  who  surrounded  him,  and  told  the 
British  officer,  that  if  he  had  brought  him  such  a  proposal  ^noi^;- 
in'4ly,  he  would  instantly  have  caused  him  to  be  executed  on  a 
gibbet.  The  answer  he  returned  was  remarkable:  "You  have 
endeavoured  to  dishonor  me  in  the  eyes  of  ray  troops,  by  suppo- 
sing me  so  vile,  flagitious,  and  base,  as  to  be  capable  of  betray- 


100  BISTORT    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

ing  my  trust  for  a  bribe  ;  this  is  an  affiont  for  which  you  owe 
me  personal  satisfaction,  and  I  demand  it  in  the  name  of  honour. 
Wherefore,  previous  to  any  general  action,  I  offer  you  single 
combat  until  one  of  us  falls;  leaving  to  you  the  choice  of  arms, 
either  on  foot  or  horseback.  Your  situation,  as  my  enemy  on 
the  part  of  your  country,  did  not  give  you  a  right  to  offer  me  a 
personal  insult ;  and  as  a  private  person,  1  ask  satisfaction  for  an 
injury  done  n)e  by  an  individual." 

L'AcuI,  an  important  fortress  in  the  vicinity  of  Leogane,  was 
next  attacked  on  the  19th  of  February,  by  Colonel  Whitelocke. 
Baron  de  Montalembert,  with  about  two  hundred  colonial  troops, 
and  a  few  of  the  British  artillery,  previously  embarked  on  trans- 
ports, having  orders  to  land  and  attack  the  fort  at  a  given  hour, 
and  Captain  Vincent,  with  the  light  infantry  of  the  49th,  and 
about  eighty  of  the  colonial  tioops,  took  a  mountain  road.  Ow- 
ing to  the  mismanagement  of  one  of  the  transports,  the  troops 
under  the  command  of  the  Baron  de  Montalenjberl  could  not 
be  landed.  The  Colonel,  in  consequence,  came  to  the  deter- 
mination of  attacking  the  fort  by  storm;  and  detached  Major 
Spencer,  with  the  grenadiers  of  the  49th  regiment,  and  light 
infantry  of  the  13th,  to  join  Captain  Vincent,  and  approach  the 
fort  by  the  mountain  road,  while  he  himself  marched  by  the 
great  road  for  the  same  purpose.  At  half  past  four  or  five 
o'clock,  the  two  columns  moved  forward,  under  a  heavy  fire  of 
cannon  and  musquetry,  but  the  orders  to  advance  and  gain  the 
fort,  were  rapidly  executed.  Lieutenant  M'Kerras  of  the  En- 
gineers, and  Captain  Hutchinson  of  the  Royals,  were  wounded, 
but  continued  their  exertions  till  the  fort  surrendered.  Cap- 
tain Murshead,  Lieutenant  Tinlin  of  the  20th  grenadiers,  Lieu- 
lenani  Caulfield  of  the  62d  regiment,  and  some  privates,  were 
blown  up  from  the  explosion  of  a  quantity  of  powder  and  otiier 
combustibles  in  one  of  the  buildings,  which  was  fired  by  order 
of  the  commanding  ofiicer.  Captain  Morshead  died  the  next 
day ;  Lieutenant  Caulfield  some  time  after  followed,  and  both 
were  interred  with  military  honours.  Lieutenant  Tinlin  recov- 
ered. 

The  next  expedition  was  directed  against  a  strong  post  and 


EXPEDITION    AGAINST    BOMPARD.  101 

settlement  at  Bompard,  about  fifteen  miles  from  Cape  St.  Nicho- 
las, where  a  colony  of  Germans  had  established  themselves.  A 
detachment  of  two  hundred  men,  from  the  different  corps,  were 
ordered  on  this  service  under  the  command  of  Major  Spencer 
and  Lieutenant  Colonel  Markham.  They  were  repulsed,  how- 
ever, by  superior  numbers,  with  the  loss  of  forty-two  men ; 
sixteen  killed,  and  twenty-six  taken  prisoners,  after  fighting 
bravely. 

The  enemy,  however,  were  repulsed  in  another  quarter. 
One  of  the  lieutenants  of  Rigaud,  with  one  thousand  five  hun- 
dred men  of  different  colours,  had  prepared  to  attack  L'Acul 
de  Leogane  ;  on  the  day  preceding  they  were  intercepted  by 
four  hundred  men,  (only  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  whom  vvtre 
of  the  British  legion,  and  the  remainder  of  the  miliiia  of  Leo- 
gane,) under  the  command  of  the  Baron  de  Montalembert,  who 
routed  them  and  took  a  piece  of  cannon.  They  charged  with 
fixed  bayonets,  and  upwards  of  three  hundred  of  the  enemy  were 
killed. 

A  few  British  troops  also  left  In  possession  of  Cape  Tiburon, 
were  attacked  on  the  16ih  of  April,  by  an  arny  consisting  chitily 
of  revolted  negroes,  amounting  to  upwards  of  two  thousand,  led 
on  by  Andrew  Rigaud,  a  man  of  colour,  who  commarided  at 
Aux  Cayes.  The  fort  was  defended  with  much  spirit  for  six 
hours,  when  the  besieged,  quitting  the  fort,  routed  the  besiegers 
with  great  slaughter,  one  hundred  and  seventy  of  their  number 
being  left  dead  on  the  field  ;  but  it  was  discovered  that  no  less 
than  twenty-eight  of  the  British  soldiers  had  fallen,  and  one 
hundred  or  more  of  the  colonial  troops  were  severely  wounded. 

During  a  period  of  eight  months  no  re-inforcement  had  ai  riv- 
ed from  Great  Britain,  and  the  British  force  in  all  parts  of  the 
island  amounted  only  to  about  nine  hundred  effective  men. 
This  proved  very  dispiriting ;  some  of  the  planters  began  to 
declare  themselves  hostile  ;  and  desertions  were  frequent  from 
most  of  the  parishes.  The  gairison  at  Jean  Rabell,  which  a 
few  months  before,  had  voluntarily  declared  fur  the  British 
government,  compelled  their  officers  to  deliver  up  the  po«t  to 
Lavaux,  the  French  general;  and  it  was  feared  other  places 
would  follow  their  example. 


102  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

At  this  critical  juncture,  on  the  19th  of  May,  his  Majesty's 
ships  the  Belliqueux,  the  Irresistible,  and  the  Fly  sloop,  anchor- 
ed in  the  harbour  of  Cape  St.  Nicholas,  having  on  board  the 
22d.  23d,  and  41st  regiments  of  infantry,  under  the  command 
of  General  VVhyte.  This  event  afforded  the  highest  satisfaction, 
and  an  immediate  hope  was  indulged  of  the  capture  of  Port-au- 
Prince.  Its  harbour  was  known  to  be  crowded  with  ships,  most 
of  which  were  supposed  to  be  richly  laden,  and  every  one  an- 
ticipated the  possession  of  wealth  from  the  capture. 

General  VVhyte,  accordingly,  having  landed  his  sick  at  Cape 
St.  Nicholas,  and  taken  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  garrison  in 
their  room,  proceeded  on  the  23d  to  the  place  appointed  in  the 
road  of  Arcahaye,  to  concert  measures  with  Commodore  Ford, 
who  had  for  some  time  blockaded  the  harbour,  and  to  receive 
on  board  such  of  the  colonial  troops  as  were  to  co-operate.  In 
the  evening  of  the  SOth,  the  squadron  cast  anchor  off  Port-au- 
Prince  :  there  were  four  ships  of  the  line,  the  Europa,  the  Bel- 
liqueux, the  Irresistible,  and  the  Sceptre,  three  frigates,  and  lour 
or  five  smaller  vessels  under  the  immediate  command  of  Com- 
modore Ford.  The  land  forces,  under  the  orders  of  General 
Whyte,  consisted  of  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  sixty-five 
rank  and  file,  fit  for  duty. 

After  making  the  necessary  preparations,  early  the  next  morn- 
ing, a  flag  was  sent  to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  town,  but 
the  letter  was  returned  linopened  ;  when  operations  were  com- 
menced by  cannonading  Fort  Bizotton,  which  stood  on  a  com- 
manding eminence,  and  was  defended  by  five  hundred  men, 
eight  pieces  of  cannon,  and  two  mortars.  The  sea  front  was 
attacked  by  two  line-of-battle-ships,  but  no  great  impression 
being  made.  Major  Spencer,  with  three  hundred  British,  and 
five  hundred  of  the  colonial  troops,  landed  in  the  evening 
within  a  mile  of  the  fort,  to  attack  on  the  land-side.  About 
eight  o'clock  at  night,  a  tremendous  thunder-storm  arose,  ac- 
companied with  a  deluge  of  rain,  of  which  Captain  Daniel,  of 
the  41st,  being  directed  to  take  advantage,  he,  with  only  sixty 
men  rushed  forward',  and  finding  a  breach  in  the  walls,  entered 
with  fixed  bayonets,  and  subdued  the  fortress.     Captain  Daniel 


CONQUEST   OF    PORT-AU-PRINCE.  103 

received  a  severe  wound  in  the  attack,  while  his  brave  associate, 
Captain  Wallace,  the  second  in  command,  was  «kiiled  on  the 
glacis. 

The  fate  of  Port-au-Prince  was  now  decided.  It  was  evac- 
uated by  the  enemy  '"^n  the  4th  of  June  ;  and  both  the  town  and 
the  shipping  in  the  harbour  were  preserved  from  conflagration, 
although  the  republican  commissioners  had  given  orders  and 
made  preparations  for  their  beins  set  on  fire.  The  com- 
missioners, with  many  of  their  adherents,  made  their  escape  to 
the  mountains.  • 

In  the  harbour  were  found  two-and-twenty  top-sail  vessels,  fully 
laden  with  sugar,  indigo,  and  coffee,  of  which  thirteen  were  from 
three  to  five  hundred  tons  burthen,  and  the  remaining  nine,  from 
one  hundred  and  fifty  to  three  hundred  tons;  besides  seven 
thousand  tons  of  shipping  in  ballast ;  the  value  of  all  which,  at 
a  moderate  computation,  could  not  be  far  short  of  £400,000 
sterling;  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  pieces  of  cannon  regular- 
ly mounted  in  batteries,  were  on  the  lines. 

A  large  booty  was  conveyed  away  by  the  commissioners  on 
two  hundred  mules,  besides  which  they  had  nearly  two  thousand 
persons  in  their  train  Finding  the  people  of  colour  possessed 
of  the  whole  natural  strength  of  the  island,  under  the  mulatto 
Rigaiid,  and  a  negro  named  Toussaint  L'Ouverture,  they  soon 
after  quitted  the  colony  altogether  for  France,  where  they  re- 
ceived from  the  government  a  sanction  of  their  proceedings. 

Immediately  after  the  capture  of  the  town,  the  same  dreadful 
disease,  which  had  been  so  prevalent  in  the  preceding  autumn, 
renewed  its  destructive  progress  among  the  troops.  The  Bri- 
tish commanders  found  it  necessary  to  strengthen  the  lines,  and 
raise  additional  intrenchments  on  that  side  of  the  town  which 
fronts  the  mountains  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  the  soldiers 
were  compelled  to  dig  the  ground  in  the  day,  and  to  perform 
military  duty  in  the  night ;  exposed  to  the  burning  rays  of  the 
sun  ;  and  to  the  noxious  dews  and  heavy  rains  of  the  climate. 
Most  of  these  men  had  been  confined  six  months  on  ship  board, 
without  fr'esh  provisions  or  exerci&e,  and  hence  the  garrison  was 
daily  diminished  and  enfeebled.     The  French  troops  suffered 


104  THE    NEGROES    TAKE    LEOGANE 

almost  as  much  as  the  British  :  otherwise  Port-au-Prince  would 
have  been  so«on  retaken. 

The  arrival  of  a  reinforcement  from  the  Windward  Islands 
on  the  8th  of  June,  contributed  to  the  rapid  increase  and  aggra- 
vation of  their  miseries.  It  consisted  of  eight  flank  companies 
belongingJo  the  22d,  23d,  35th,  and  4 1st  regiments,  arrived  at 
Port-au-Prince,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Lennox.  They  consisted,  on  their  embarkation,  of  about  sev- 
enty men  each,  but  the  aggregate  number,  when  landed,  was 
not  quite  three  hundred.  Upwards  of  one  hundred  of  their 
number  were  buried  in  the  deep,  in  the  short  passage  between 
Guadaloupe  and  Jamaica,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  more  were 
left  in  a  dying  state  at  Poit  Royal.  Such  was  the  mortality, 
after  their  arrival,  that  no  less  than  forty  officers,  and  upwards  of 
six  hundred  rank  and  file  met  an  untimely  death  in  the  short 
space  of  two  tnonths. 

General  Whyte,  whose  health  was  much  impaired,  now  re- 
turned to  Europe;  and  about  the  middle  of  September,  was 
succeeded  in  the  command  by  Brigadier-General  Horneck: 
who  possessed  the  requisite  qualifications  for  such  a  station,  but 
had  peculiar  difficulties  to  encounter.  The  only  reinforcement 
which  followed  him,  being  fifty  men  from  Jamaica,  and  no  other 
troops  arriving  for  seven  months  after,  he  was  compelled  to  act 
chiefly  on  the  defensive.  The  mulattoes,  under  Rigaud,  gained 
possession  of  Leogane,  and  put  to  death  all  the  French  planter? 
who  fell  into  their  power.  . 

This  was  followed  by  other  reverses.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Brisbane,  with  only  eighty  British,  and  about  eleven  hundred 
colonial  troops,  had  obtained  great  successes  in  the  plain  of 
Artibonite ;  the  negroes  had  been  routed  in  various  quarters , 
and  the  mulatto  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  St.  Marc  had  entered 
into  engagements  of  neutrality.  But  while  Colonel  Brisbane 
was  pursuing  his  successes  at  a  distance,  having  left  in  St.  Marc 
only  a  small  garrison  of  about  forty  British  soldiers,  the  men 
of  colour  violated  their  promises,  took  up  arms,  and  put  to  death 
all  who  fell  in  their  way,  whom  they  considered  as  enemies  to 
the  French  republic.     The  garrison  saved  themselves  by  taking 


FRENCH  PLOTS  DEFEATED.  105 

refuge  in  a  fort,  from  which  they  were  relieved  by  a  frigate  from 
the  Mole  of  Cape  St.  Nicholas.  Colonel  Brrsbane  soon  after 
returned,  and  recovered  possession  of  the  town;  but  lost  all  the 
advantages  he  bad  |!;ained  on  the  plain,  and  the  negroes  were 
emboldened  to  proceed  to  more  active  and  vigorous  hostilities. 

Rigaud,  who  commanded  in  the  south,  made  a  bold  effort, 
which,  if  successful,  must  have  been  followed  by  the  speedy 
conquest  of  Port-au-Prince.  On  the  5th  of  December,  three 
columns  of  his  troops,  amounting  to  two  thousand  men,  attacked 
Fort  Bizotton  ;  but  were  defeated  with  great  slaughter.  Not 
discouraged  by  this  failure,  the  mulatto  chief  made  immediate 
preparations  for  the  recovery  of  Tiburon.  The  armament, 
consisting  of  a  biig  of  sixteen  guns,  and  three  schooners  of 
fourteen  guns  each,  with  a  military  force  of  three  thousand  men, 
of  various  colours,  sailed  from  X  ux  Cayes  on  the  23d  of  Decem- 
ber. They  reached  Tiburon,  and  commenced  the  attack  on 
the  25th  of  the  same  month.  The  garrison,  consisting  of  only 
four  hundred  and  eighty  men,  principally  colonists,  defended 
the  fort  for  four  days;  when  three  hundred  of  them  having  fal- 
len, the  survivors,  with  great  bravery,  fought  their  way  for  five 
miles  through  the  enemy,  till  they  reached  (rois. 

While  the  British  commanders  were  fully  employed  in  resis- 
ting the  attacks  of  open  enemies,  they  were  in  danger  of  falling 
victims  to  the  treachery  of  professed  friends.  Soon  after  Colo- 
nel Brisbane  had  driven  the  mulattoes  frotn  St.  ]\Iarc,  a  conspi- 
racy was  formed  against  his  life  by  sonie  of  the  white  inhabitants 
who  had  placed  themselves  under  British  protection.  It  was 
most  seasonably  detected  and  defeated.  About  a  n)onth  after, 
a  more  daring  and  extensive  plot  was  discovered  at  Port-au- 
Prince  ;  where  some  of  the  French  inhabitant-^  intended  to 
seize  the  garrison,  and  put  all  the  English  to  death.  Twenty 
of  the  conspirators  were  tried  by  a  council  of  war.  composed  of 
the  principal  commanders,  naval  and  military  ;  among  whom 
were  five  French  field  officers.  They  were  all  condemned  to 
death  ;  and  fifteen  of  them  were  accordingly  shot  on  the  l8th 
of  February,  1795. 

Colonel  Brisbane,  however  did  not  long  survive  bis  narrow 


106  HISTORY    OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

escape  of  assassination  ;  being  killed  while  out  on  a  recruiting 
party,  in  the  beginning  of  March.  By  his  death  the  British  in- 
terest in  St.  Domingo  sustained  a  loss  not  ea'^ily  to  be  repaired. 
In  this  month,  the  negroes  acrain  laid  siege  to  fort  Bizolton, 
and  were  again  repulsed.  Their  colours  and  five  pieces  of  can- 
non were  taken,  and  six  hundred  of  ihem  were  slain.  The  Bri- 
tish had  to  lament  the  fate  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Markhain, 
who  fell  in  attacking  one  of  the  advanced  posts  of  the  besiegers. 
About  the  end  of  April,  the  British  troops  were  reinforced  by 
the  arrival  of  the  SI  stand  96th,  and  a  few  of  the  S2d  regiments: 
but  they  were  immediately  incapacitated  for  action  by  the  pes- 
tilential disease,  fioin  which  many  of  them  were  never  to  recover. 
The  remainder  of  the  82d  regiment  arrived  in  the  month  of 
August ;  they  were  attacked  by  the  same  distemper,  and  offline 
hundred  and  eighty,  only  three  hundred  and  fifty  remained  alive 
at  the  end  of  six  weeks. 

The  operations  during  this  summer  were  under  the  direction 
of  Major-General  Williamson,  the  governor  of  Jamaica  ;  who 
having  been  appointed  commander  in-chief  of  all  the  British 
possessions  in  the  West  Indies,  arrived  at  Port-au-Prince  in  the 
month  of  May.  He  lost  no  time  in  endeavouring  to  strengthen 
that  capital ;  and  proceeded  to  establish  a  long  chain  of  posts 
across  mountains  and  plains,  extending  from  St.  Marc  to  Cape 
Tiburon.  The  number  of  English  troops  not  being  sufficient  to 
occupy  these  stations,  various  corps  of  negroes  « ere  formed, 
many  of  whom  were  purchased  from  French  planters  for  the 
purpose,  and  placed  under  the  command  of  regular  officers  ; 
but  the  little  efficiency  of  these  corps  disappointed  the  hopes 
entertained  respecting  them,  and  proved  very  inadequate  to  the 
expense  of  their  formation  and  support.  After  a  few  months 
spent  in  measures  of  preparation  and  precaution,  General  Wil- 
liamson was  succeeded  by  Major-General  Forbes  ;  who  follow- 
ed up  the  arrangements  of  his  predecessor,  strengthening  the 
cordons,  ancl  augmenting  the  forces  by  every  means  he  could 
employ,  ile  was  particularly  careful  to  secure  the  frontiers  of 
Mireballais  and  Banica,  to  maintain  a  communication  with  the 
Spanish  part  of  the  island,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  cattle 
and  other  necessary  supplies. 


PEACi:    BETWEEN    FRANCE    AND    SPAIN.  107 

This  year  witnessed  the  termination  of  the  war  between 
France  and  Spain.  By  the  ninth  article  of  the  treaty  of  peace 
between  those  powers,  concluded  on  the  2Zd  of  July,  the  king 
of  Spain,  for  himself  and  his  successors,  relinquished  all  right 
to  the  Spa[ii-h  part  of  St.  Domingo,  ceding  it  to  the  French 
republic  in  perpetual  sovereiornty  : — a  month  after  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty  should  be  known  in  the  island,  the  Spanish  troops 
were  to  be  in  readiness  to  evacuate  the  places,  ports,  and  estab- 
lishments which  they  then  occupied,  in  order  to  give  them  up 
to  the  French  troops  as  soon  as  they  should  arrive  to  take  pos- 
session of  them  : — these  places  were  to  be  delivered  up  with  all 
the  cannons  and  stores  which  should  be  in  them  at  the  moment 
when  the  tieaty  should  be  known  in  the  island  : — and  the  inhabi* 
tants  of  the  ceded  ten  itory.  who  should  pi  efer  removing  with  their 
property  into  the  dominions  of  the  king  of  Spain,  were  to  be 
at  liberty  to  do  so, within  tlie  space  of  a  year  from  the  date  of  the 
treaty. 

Towards  the  close  of  this  year,  the  British  government  hav- 
ing determined  on  a  vigorous  effoit  to  revive  the  drooping  cause 
in  St.  Domingo,  dispatched  a  reinfoi  cement  of  about  seven 
thousand  troops,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General 
Howe.  But  the  voyage  was  stormy  and  disastrous ;  more  than 
six  months  elapsed,  between  their  departure  from  Cork  and 
their  arrival  at  the  Mole  of  St.  Nicholas  :  and  then  they  were 
under  the  necessity  of  remaining  on  board  ihe  transports  for 
several  weeks.  Such  a  force,  at  an  early  period  of  the  war, 
would  probably  have  been  sufficient  for  the  entire  subjugation 
of  the  colony ;  but  was  now  incompetent  to  maintain  the 
ground  still  possessed,  against  the  power  and  discipline  of  their 
adversaries. 

The  town  of  Leogane  being  left  by  the  English  in  a  defence- 
less state,  the  mulattoes  surrounded  it  with  a  palisaded  ditch,  and 
began  to  fortify  the  harbour.  General  Forbes,  regarding  it  as  a 
station  of  considerable  importance,  attempted  to  dislodge  them  ; 
but,  for  want  of  artillery,  was  obliged  to  retire  with  great  loss. 
Bombarde  was  invested  by  a  body  of  British  troops,  and  imme- 
diately surrendered  by  capitulation  ;  but  was  soon  after  cvacu- 


108  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

ated.  Rigaud  arttacked  the  post  at  Irois,  and  was  repulsed  ;  but 
the  besieged  had  a  hundred  men  killed  and  wounded,  among 
the  latter  of  whom  was  Major-General  Bovvyer.  the  comman- 
dant. 

The  British  force  became  daily  more  and  more  languid,  and 
the  spirit  of  the  enemy  more  confident  and  enterprizing.  Hos- 
tilities were  carried  ahnost  to  the  capital  itself;  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  which,  the  mulattoes  displayed  the  greatest  activity, 
erecting  batteries  and  fortifying  posts  without  the  least  inter- 
ruption from  the  English,  though  within  four  miles  of  their  head 
quarters. 

In  this  situation  of  affairs,  the  British  government  determined 
on  confiding  the  chief  command  to  General  Simcoe,  an  officer 
of  great  skill  and  long  experience.  He  landed  at  St.  Nicholas 
Mole  in  March  J 797,  and  without  loss  of  time,  entered  on  the 
business  of  his  arduous  commission.  In  the  same  month,  the 
ncgio.  Toussaint  L'Ouverture,  was  appointed  by  the  French 
government,  general-in-chief  of  the  armies  in  St.  Domingo;  an 
appointn)ent  which  in  reality  was  merely  an  honorary  sanction 
of  the  power  he  had  long  exercised.  He  continued  to  display  the 
same  activity,  courage,  and  talent,  which  had  hitherto  distin- 
guished him  :  so  that  General  Simcoe  found  him  a  most  power- 
ful opponent.  He  n)enaced  the  frontiei  post  of  Mireballais  ; 
and,  to  avoid  falling  into  his  liands.  the  English  garrison  at  once 
evacuated  it,  and  retired  to  Port-au  Piince,  abandoning  to  the 
enemy  the  fertile  plain  of  the  C'ul  de  Sac,  and  relinquishing  the 
communication  vviih  Banica.  and  the  Spanish  part  of  tlie  island. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  negroes  were  driven  from  their  posts 
in  the  vicinity  of  Port-au-Prince  :  Kigaud  was  repulsed  in  ano- 
ther attack  on  the  English  post  at  Irois  ;  and  Toussaint  himself 
was  repulsed  from  the  town  of  Si.  Marc.  These  inconsiderable 
advantages,  however,  were  dearly  purchased,  and  the  strength 
of  the  Briti'^h  in  the  island  was  daily  diminishing. 

Weary  of  this  petty  warfare,  Geneial  Simcoe  left  the  island  in 
August  and  returned  to.  England.  His  place  was  filled  by 
Major-General  Whyte.  Major-General  Nesbit  was  soon  after 
appointed  to  this  difficult  station,  but  died  before  he  could  enter 


EVACUATION    OF    THE    BRITISH.  109 

upon  it.  By  his  death,  the  command  devolved  on  the  Honour- 
able Biigadier-Oeneral  Maitland,  who  arrived  at  Port-au-Prince 
in  April,  1798.  This  officer  was  well  qualified,  by  military 
skill,  as  well  as  local  experience,  for  the  situation  in  which  he 
was  placed  :  but  the  Bi  itish  government  had  been  too  fully  oc- 
cupied with  the  politics  and  hostilities  ol  Europe,  to  give  much 
attention  to  St.  Domingo,  or  U)  send  thither  such  an  additional 
force  as  could  justify  any  rational  hopes  of  ultimate  success. 

General  Maitland  soon  perceived  that  it  only  remained  for 
him  to  terminate  the  career  of  disappointment  and  discomfiture, 
by  retiring  from  the  scene  of  so  many  disasters,  with  the  best 
grace  in  his  power.  Having  agreed  with  the  enen^y  on  a 
month's  truce,  and  stipulated  for  the  security  of  all  the  friends 
of  the  English,  he  evacuated  Port-au-Prince,  and  letired  to 
Jeremie.  Afterwards  he  retired,  with  the  remainder  of  his 
force  to  the  Mole,  where  he  contluded  his  negocialions  with 
Toussaint ;  giving  up  all  the  possessions  of  the  English,  together 
with  their  colonial  black  troops,  and  enteringinto  some  commer- 
cial stipulations,  which  recognized  St.  Domingo  as  an  indepen- 
dent and  neutral  power. 

Such  was  the  conclusion  of  an  enterprize,  which,  abstracted 
from  all  considerations  of  justice  and  humanity,  and  exammed 
only  by  the  rules  of  political  prudence,  ought  never  to  have 
been  undertaken.  If  the  object  of  the  British  ministry  was  in 
reality  what  was  professed,  to  obtain  possession  of  the  whole  of 
the  French  part  of  the  island,  the  means  employed,  in  compari- 
son with  the  numbers  and  exertions  of  the  inhabitants,  were  alto- 
gether contemptible.  If  their  real  object  was  to  preserve  the 
British  islands  from  the  revolutionary  spirit,  and  to  prevent 
their  separation  from  the  m«ther  country,  the  sacrifices  made 
were  too  immense  for  the  value  of  those  colonies  ever  to  repay. 


CHAP.  VII. 

PROM    THE    EVACUATION    OF    THE    ISLAND    BY   THE    BRITISH    IN 
1798,  TO  THE  DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE  IN  JULY  1801. 

Several  Negro  chiefs. — All  superseded  by  Toussaint. — His  birth. — His 
early  character. — His  kind  treatment  by  his  Master. — His  diligence 
and  proficiency  in  learning. — Not  concerned  in  the  first  insurrec- 
tion — His  gratitude  and  generosity  to  his  master. — Joins  the  black 
army.,  and  is  appointed  an  officer. — Soon  advanced  to  the  command 
of  a  division. — His  talents  for  war — and  government  — His  pru* 
dence,  benevolence,  activity,  and  veracity. — JFirst  espoused  the  cause 
of  royalty — but  afterwards  acknowledged  the  republic  — His  kind- 
ness to  General  Laveaux- — Forgiveness  of  injuries. — Honourable 
conduct  towards  General  Maitland — Promotion  of  agriculture— 
The  increase  of  population. — State  of  society. —  Tour  of  Toussaint 
through  the  island. — Constitution  formed, — Declaration  of  indepen- 
dence. 

Civil  wars  and  revolutions  afford  favourable  opportunities  for 
the  expansion  of  latent  talent;  and  often  elevate  to  stations  of 
high  importance,  those  who  before  occupied,  and  seemed  des- 
tined always  to  occupy,  the  lowest  places  in  society.  The  revo- 
lution of  St.  Domingo  soon  furnished  ample  proof,  that  among 
those  whom  European  injustice  had  stigmatized  as  an  inferior 
race  of  beings,  and  doonied  to  perpetual  servitude,  were  heads 
endued  with  legislative  wisdom,  hearts  pregnant  with  heroic 
energies,  and  hands  capable  of  wielding  the  sword  of  war,  or 
swaying  the  rod  of  empire. 

The  principal  leader  of  the  Blacks,  in  the  first  period  of  the 
commotions,  was  Jean  Francois.  To  this  general  were  after- 
wards added  several  others.  The  most  eminent  were  Bias- 
sou,  Boukmant,  and  Rigaud.  These  chiefs  who  were  all  ne- 
groes, displayed  great  personal  bravery  and  military  skill ;  and, 
in  some  cases,  a  depth  of  political  prudence.     But  when  Tous- 


T0US9A1NT.  Ill 

saint  L'Overture  came  forward  into  public  life,  be  soon  attain- 
ed the  pre-eminence  above  them  all.  The  part  which  he  acted 
in  the  affairs  of  the  island,  was  so  conspicuous,  and  bis  character 
so  remarkable,  that  some  particulars  respecting  his  history,  can 
hardly  fail  of  being  interesting  to  the  reader. 

Some  have  asserted  that  Toussainl  was  born  in  Africa  :  but 
those  who  appear  to  have  had  the  best  means  of  information, 
say  that  he  was  born  in  a  state  of  slavery,  in  or  about  the  year 
1745,  on  the  plantation  of  the  Count  de  Noe  in  the  northern 
province  of  St.  Domingo,  not  far  from  Cape  Franqois. 

The  early  years  of  a  slave  are  not  likely  to  furnish  many  inci- 
dents for  the  historian  or  biographer;  and  very  little  has  been 
recorded  of  the  first  forty- five  years  of  the  life  ofToussaint. 
It  is  commonly  Tcported  anjong  his  countrymen,  that  he  display- 
ed peculiar  benevolence  towards  the  brute  animals,  and  possess- 
ed a  patience  of  temper  which  scarcely  any  thing  could  ever 
discompose.  At  the  age  of  twenty-five,  in  opposition  to  the  licen- 
tiousness by  which  he  was  surrounded,  he  attached  himself  to 
one  woman,  by  whom  be  had  several  children,  the  objects  of 
his  tender  affection  and  paternal  solicitude. 

His  regular  and  amiable  deportment  conciliated  the  favour  of 
the  baliff  or  manager  of  the  plantation,  M.  Bayou  de  Libertas. 
By  the  kindness  of  this  gentleman,  according  to  some  accounts  j 
or  by  his  own  unassisted  efforts,  according  to  other':,  he  learn- 
ed to  read  and  write,  and  made  some  progress  in  arithmetic. 
These  attainments,  which  not  one  negro  in  ten  thousand  could 
boast,  gave  him  great  distinction  afiiong  his  fellow  slaves,  and 
attracted  further  notice  from  M.  Bayou,  who  took  him  from 
the  fields,  and  appointed  him  his  postillion.  Compared  with 
the  condition  of  field  negroes,  ibis  was  a  post  of  considerable 
dignify,  and  no  little  profit.  The  increased  leisure  which  this 
promotion  afforded,  was  employed  in  cultivating  his  talents,  and 
collecting  those  stores  of  information,  which  enriched  his  mind, 
polished  his  manners,  and  prepared  him  for  a  more  extensive 
and  important  sphere  of  action. 

When  the  insurrection  of  the  negroes  took  place  in  1791, 
Toussaint  was  still  a  slave  on  the  plantation,  on  which  he  is 


112  HISTORY   OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

said  to  have  been  born.  Among  the  leaders  were  several  of 
his  friends,  who  were  anxiously  desirous  of  his  sanction  and  co- 
operation. But.  whether  from  general  humanity  of  disposi- 
tion, revolting  at  the  prospect  of  cruelty  and  massacre  ;  or 
from  personal  regard  to  a  master,  who  could  hardly  escape  be- 
ing ruined  by  the  explosion,  but  to  whose  ruin  gratitude  fgrbad 
him  to  be  accessary  ;  he  refrained  from  taking  any  part  in  the 
first  revolutionary  movements. 

The  former  tyranny  and  cruelty  of  many  of  the  owners  and 
managers,  had  fixed  in  the  minds  of  the  slaves,  a  mortal  hatred 
of  the  planters  in  general  ;  which  was  not  a  little  confirmed 
and  extended  by  the  exasperations  of  the  present  struggle. 
The  spirit  of  vengeance  by  which  they  were  impelled,  not  con- 
tent with  a  retaliation  of  wrongs  and  sufR  rings  on  the  individu- 
als by  whom  they  had  been  inflicted,  menaced  alike  the  hu- 
mane master  and  the  barbarous  tyrant ;  and  most  of  the  negroes 
were  only  to  be  satisfied  with  the  extermination  of  all  who 
bore  the  same  complexion  as  their  oppressors.  Happy  did 
those  planters  esteem  themselves  who  could  escape  from  the 
island,  though  it  wpre  to  go  with  their  families  into  a  foreign 
country,  unprovided  with  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  doon)ed 
to  experience  the  melancholy  reverse  of  all  their  former  luxury 
and  splendour. 

The  master  of  Toussaint,  now  his  master  no  more,  was  one 
who  not  having  made  ane  arly  escape,  was  on  the  point  of  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  infuriated  blacks.  In  that  event  he  would 
certainly  have  been  put  to  death.  But  his  humane  and  benefi- 
cent treatment  of  this  worthy  negro,  was  not  forgotten.  Not 
without  some  danger  of  bringing  the  vengeance  of  the  multi- 
tude on  his  own  head,  Toussaint  delivered  his  fallen  master 
from  the  impending  destruction.  He  prepared  for  the  emigra- 
tion of  M.  Bayou  de  Libertas  to  North  America  :  found  means 
to  embark  a  considerable  quantity  of  sugar  to  support  him  in 
his  exile  ;  procured  his  escape  with  his  fan)ily ;  and  contrived 
every  plan  for  his  convenience.  Nor  did  his  care  end  here  : 
for  after  M,  Bayou's  settlement  at  Baltimore  in  Maryland,  he 
availed  himself  of  every  opportunity  to  send  some  additional 


TOUSSAINT.  113 

proof  of  his  gratitude  and  friendship.  Small,  it  must  be  con- 
fessed, is  the  debt  of  gratitude  which  the  best  treatment  under 
the  iron  yoke  of  West  Indian  slavery  can  create  ;  but  a  noble 
mind  will  not  scrupulously  weigh  the  claims  of  gratitude  or 
mercy.  Toussaint  looked  less  at  the  wrong  of  keeping  him  in 
slavery,  than  at  the  kindness  which  bad  lightened  his  chain  ; 
and  M.  Bayou  was  happy  enough  to  find  in  a  liberated  negro,  a 
higher  degree  of  virtue  than  is  often  exhibited  among  the  most 
polished  natives  of  Europe. 

Having  performed  this  act  of  gratitude  and  generosity,  Tous- 
saint no  longer  refiained  from  entering  into  the  army  of  his  coun- 
try, which  had  now  begun  to  assume  a  regular  form.  He  joined 
the  corps  commanded  by  Biassou,  and  was  appointed  next  ia 
command  under  him.  Biassou  possessed  shining  military  talents ; 
but  they  were  tarnithed  by  a  ferocity  of  disposition,  which 
betrayed  him  into  cruelties  not  long  to  be  endured.  He  was 
degraded  from  his  station,  and  foussaint  was  invested  with  the 
chief  command  of  the  division. 

The  excellencies  of  his  character  unfolded  themselves  more 
and  more,  as  opportunities  were  afforded  for  their  developement. 
The  same  humanity  and  benevolence  which  had  adorned  his 
humble  life,  continued  to  distinguish  him  in  his  elevation.  He 
never  imitated  the  conduct  of  the  other  leaders,  in  flattering 
the  multitude,  encouraging  them  in  crimes,  or  urging  them  to 
revenge  and  slaughter  : — on  the  contrary  ;  mercy,  industry,  and 
order,  were  always  inculcated  by  his  counsels,  recommended 
by  his  example,  and  enforced  by  his  authority.  The  fertility 
of  his  invention,  the  correctness  of  his  judgment,  the  celeritv  of 
his  movements,  the  extent  of  his  labours,  in  the  combined  and 
multifarious  business  of  war  and  government,  astonished  both 
friends  and  foes.  The  following  description  was  given  by  one 
of  his  enemies  : — *'  He  has  a  fine  eye,  and  his  glances  are  rapid 
and  penetrating.  Extremely  sober  by  habit,  his  activity  in  the 
prosecution  of  his  enterprises  is  incessant.  He  is  an  excellent 
horseman,  and  travels,  on  occasion,  with  inconceivable  rapuiity, 
arriving  frequently  at  the  end  of  his  journey  alone,  or  almost 
unattended  ;  his  aid- de-camps  and   domestics  being  unable  to 

16 


114  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

follow  him  in  journeys  often  extending  to  fifty  or  sixty  leagues. 
He  generally  sleeps  in  his  clolhes,  and  allows  very  little  time, 
either  for  his  repose  or  for  his  meals." 

If  there  was  one  trait  in  his  character  more  conspicuous  than 
the  rest,  it  was  his  unsullied  integrity.  7  hat  he.  ntver  broke  his 
word,  was  a  proverbial  expression  common  in  the  mouths  of  the 
white  inhabitants  of  the  island,  and  of  the  Engiisb  officers  who 
were  employed  in  hostiliiies  against  him.  Of  ihe  reliance  plac- 
ed on  his  engagenients,  even  in  ciicuujstances  of  peculiar  deli- 
cacy and  difficulty,  by  persons  who  had  the  best  means  of  esti- 
mating their  value,  an  unequivocal  spec  imen  was  exhibited  by 
many  of  the  exiled  planters  and  merchants  ;  whom  his  invitation 
and  pronjise  of  protection  induced  to  return  from  Nurih  Amer- 
ica, and  othei  places,  to  which  they  had  fled.  He  restored 
them  to  the  estates  uf  which  th<y  had  been  deprived  ;  nor  did 
his  subsequent  conduct  ever  prove  him  unworthy  of  their  confi- 
dence. 

When  Toussaint  was  first  raised  to  dignity  and  power,  the 
contest  between  the  blacks  and  tiieir  former  masteis  was  termi- 
nattd;  and  the  French  commissioners  who  endeavoured  to 
govern  the  colony,  acknowleged  the  liberty  of  the  negroes,  and 
avowed  iheir  determination  to  maintain  it.  But  another  civil 
war  soon  arose,  and  was  carried  on  for  some  time  with  great 
fury,  between  the  friends  of  the  dethroned  French  king,  and 
those  of  the  convention.  In  this  contlict  men  of  all  cq^mplexions 
were  found  on  both  sides  ;  and  the  two  parties  had  nearly  an 
equal  number  of  blacks  and  of  whites. 

Toussaint  espoused  the  cause  of  royalty,  and  his  courage  and 
talents  soon  rendered  this  cause  as  triumphant  in  St.  Domingo, 
as  it  had  been  unsuccessful  in  France.  His  services  in  this  war- 
fare were  deemed  so  important  and  meritorious,  that  before 
Spain  deserted  the  coalition  formed  by  the  great  powers  of 
Eu!  ope  against  French  republi(  anism,  he  received  a  commission 
conferring  upon  him  the  rank  of  general  in  the  Spanish  army, 
and  was  honoured  with  the  ancient  military  order  of  that  country^ 

But  events  occurred  which  led  Toussaint  to  think  it  inconsis- 
tent with  good  policy  and  true   patriotism,  to  pertevere  in  his 


TOUSSAINT.  115 

hostility  against  the  existing  government  of  France.  When  the 
planters  and  royalists  solicited  the  assistance  of  Great  Britain, 
their  object  in  that  solicitation,  however  favourable  to  French 
royalty,  was  decidedly  adverse  to  the  freedom  of  the  negrotrs: 
it  was  less  for  the  sake  of  restoring  tlie  sovereignty  of  France  to 
the  Bourbons,  than  with  the  hope  of  recovering  the  iron  scep- 
tres of  their  own  plantations,  that  most  of  ihose  men  desired  to 
see  the  British  flag  fl}ing  at  St.  Domingo.  Toussaint  found 
himself  under  the  necessity  of  making  amicable  terms  with  the 
French  commissioners,  or  of  uniting  with  British  invaders,  and 
with  Frenchmen  whom  he  knew  to  be  determined  foes  of  the 
liberty  of  his  race.  In  this  alternative  he  could  be  at  no  loss 
which  course  to  adopt ;  he  gave  peace  to  the  republicans  whom 
he  had  conquered,  and  acknowledged  the  authority  of  the  con- 
vention. 

From  this  period  he  shewed  himself  a  faithful  servant  of 
France,  under  every  change  in  its  government.  The  successive 
rulers  of  the  republic  sent  out  various  commissioners,  who  carri- 
ed across  the  Atlantic  the  same  fondness  for  confiscation  and 
plunder  as  their  masters  exhibited  at  home.  Every  man  of  pro- 
perty was  in  danger  of  being  proscribed  as  a  traitor.  But  their 
schemes  of  exaction  and  murder  found  a  powerful  check  in  the 
Justice  and  generosity  of  Toussaint;  whose  consummate  pru- 
dence avoided  all  offence  and  disrespect  to  the  French  govern- 
ment, while  he  reduced  its  representatives  to  a  state  of  political 
impotence.  Securing  them  from  insult  and  injury,  requiring 
his  followers  to  give  all  due  honour  to  their  office,  and  treating 
them  himself  with  external  demonstrations  of  respect,  he  con- 
trived to  leave  them  only  a  nominal  authority.  Some  commis- 
..^ioners  were  recalled  and  succeeded  by  others,  and  among  them 
were  men  of  considerable  ability  ;  but  Toussaint  was  more  thaa 
a  match  for  them  all.  He  retained  the  real  power,  and  they 
were  obliged  to  lean  upon  him  for  protection.  He  protected 
the  planters  from  the  commissioners,  and  both  from  the  jealou- 
sy of  the  neirroes. 

His  benevolent  interposition  to  avert  the  stroke  of  popular 
fury,  was  once  experienced  m  the  most  critical  circumstances  by 

t 


116  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

General  Lareaux.  When  the  negroes  of  Cape  Francois,  suspect- 
ing that  commander  of  designs  against  their  freedom,  bad  risen 
against  him  and  thrown  him  into  prison,  and  were  preparing  to  put 
him  to  death,  Toussaint,  with  a  band  "of  faithful  foHowers,  marched 
into  the  town,  and  delivered  him  out  of  their  hands.  Laveaux 
publicly  acknowledged  his  obligation  for  this  deliverance,  and 
declared  his  resolution  to  regulate  all  his  future  proceedings  in 
the  island  by  Toussaint's  advice. 

Though  Toussaint,  for  a  considerable  time,  possessed  unlimi- 
ted power,  he  has  never  been  charged  with  its  abuse.  The 
acts  of  rigour  which  took  place  under  his  administration,  were 
performed  in  the  regular  execution  of  martial  law,  or  in  the 
piogress  of  arrangements  demanded  by  existing  circumstances; 
while  he  sought  every  opportunity  of  exercising  the  lenity  so 
congenial  to  his  native  disposition.  In  some  cases  in  which  the 
established  regulations  of  military  discipline  would  have  united 
with  strong  resentments  of  personal  injury,  to  prescribe  the  in- 
fliction of  exemplary  vengeance,  he  displayed  a  generosity  of 
forgiveness  which  would  have  done  honour  to  'the  heart  of  the 
most  enlightened  potentate  in  Europe.  Of  this  rare  generosity, 
the  following  incident  affords  a  memorable  specimen. 

Four  Frenchmen  who  had  deserted  him  with  aggravated 
treachery,  were  retaken.  Every  one  expected  that  they  vvoijjd 
be  put  to  a  cruel  death.  Leaving  them,  however,  in  suspense 
as  to  their  fate,  Toussaint  ordered  them  to  be  produced  in 
church  on  the  following  Sunday;  and  while  that  part  of  the 
service  was  pronouncing  which  respects  mutual  forgiveness,  he 
went  with  them  to  the  front  of  the  altar ;  where,  after  endea- 
vouring to  impress  their  minds  with  the  flagitiousness  of  their 
conduct,  he  ordered  them  to  be  discharged  without  further 
punishment. 

His  negociations  with  General  Maitland  exemplified  the  un- 
impeachable probity  which  marked  all  his  official  transactions 
with  other  countries,  and  exhibited  a  fine  contrast  to  the  exe- 
crable perfidy  which  he  was  solicited  to  practise  by  an  unprin- 
cipled commissioner  of  the  French  republic. 

During  the  treaty  by  which  the  British  troops  were  to  evacu- 


TOCSSAINT.  117 

ate  St.  Domingo,  and  the  island  was  to  remain  neutral  to  the 
end  of  the  war,  Toussaint  visited  General  Mai'.land  at  his  head 
quarters:  and,  another  personal  interview  being  desirable  fur 
the  purpose  of  settling  some  points  before  the  embaikation  of 
the  troops,  General  Maitland  engaged  to  return  the  vi<=it  at 
Toussaint's  camp.  With  perfect  confidence  in  ihe  integrity  of 
his  character,  the  general  did  not  hesitate  to  go  to  hirn  with  only 
two  or  three  attendants,  though  it  was  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  his  own  army^  and  he  Lad  to  pass  through  a  country  full 
of  negroes,  who  had  lately  been  his  mortal  enemies.  Monsieur 
Roume,  the  French  commissioner,  thought  this  visit  afforded 
a  most  favourable  opportunity  for  serving  the  cause  of  his 
government:  and  having,  it  would  seem,  no  scruples  of  honour 
or  conscience  about  the  lawfulness  of  any  means  likely  to  ac- 
complish a  desired  purpose,  he  wrote  to  Toussaint,  urgintr  him, 
as  a  true  republican,  to  detain  the  British  general  as  a  prisoner. 
While  General  Maitland  was  on  the  road  towards  the  camp,  he 
received  a  letter  from  a  private  friend,  informing  him  of 
Roume's  plot,  and  warning  him  not  to  trust  himself  in  the 
power  of  the  negro  chief:  but  consulting  the  good  of  the  ser- 
vice in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  still  relying  upon  Toussaint's 
honour,  he  bravely  determined  to  proceed.  When  he  ar/ived 
at  the  head  quarters,  Toussaint  was  not  to  be  seen,  anJ  the 
general  was  desired  to  wait,  and  was  kept  in  waiting  a  consi-le- 
rable  time.  He  could  not  but  feel  much  dissatisfaction  at  a  re- 
ception apparently  so  uncivil ;  and,  perhaps,  began  to  regret  his 
neglect  of  the  caution  which  had  been  given  him  on  the  road. 
But  at  length  Toussaint  entered  the  room,  with  two  letters 
open  in  his  hand.  "  There,  general,"  said  he,  "  before  we  talk 
together,  read  these  :  one  is  a' letter  just  received  from  Roume, 
and  the  other  is  my  answer.  I  would  not  come  to  you,  till  I 
had  written  my  answer  to  him  ;  that  you  may  see  bow  safe  you 
are  with  me,  and  how  incapable  I  am  of  baseness  "  General 
Maitland,  on  reading  the  letters,  found  one  an  artful  attempt  to 
persuade  Toussaint  to  seize  his  guest,  as  an  act  of  duty  to  the 
republic;  and  the  other  a  noble  and  indignant  refusal.  "  What.^" 
said  Toussaint  to  the  perfidious  Frenchman,  "  Have  I  not  pas- 


118  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

sed  my  word  to  the  British  general  ?  How  then  can  you  suppose 
that  I  will  cover  myself  with  dishonour  by  breaking  it  ?  His  re- 
liance on  my  good  faith  leads  him  to  put  himself  in  my  power  ; 
and  1  should  be  forever  infamous,  if  I  were  to  act  as  you  advise. 
I  atn  faithfully  devoted  to  the  republic ;  but  will  not  serve  it  at 
the  expense  of  my  conscience  and  my  honour." 

With  such  talents  and  virtues,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
Toussaint  was  beloved  to  enthusiasm  by  the  negroes  who  bad 
raised  him  to  the  dignity  he  enj  >yed,  and  was  honi)ured  with 
signal  demonstrations  of  respect  and  esteem  from  public  per- 
sons of  other  nations  with  whom  he  had  occasion  to  communi- 
cate. 

When  he  found  himself  at  ease  from  the  complicated  war* 
fare  in  which  he  had  been  involved,  he  devoted  his  undisturbed 
attention  to  the  arts  of  peace  ;  and  the  policy  of  his  legislation 
was  characterised  by  the  same  sagacity  and  prudence,  the  same 
mildness  and  humanity,  which  had  distinguished  his  exploits  in 
the  field.  One  of  the  first  objects  of  his  care,  was  the  regular 
cultivation  of  the  soil,  upon  which  the  prosperity  of  every  coun- 
try must  principally  depend.  When  he  restored  many  of  the 
planters  to  their  estates,  there  was  no  restoration  of  their  former 
property  in  human  beings.  No  human  being  was  to  be  bought 
or  sold.  The  cruel  treatment  which  the  negroes  had  experien- 
ced in  their  state  of  slavery,  would  naturally  create  in  their 
minds  a  strong  aversion  to  agricultural  labour ;  and  hence  arose 
one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  which  Toussaint  had  to  overcome 
in  his  exertions  for  the  good  of  the  people  who  had  placed 
themselves  under  his  government.  Severe  tasks,  flagellations, 
and  scanty  food,  were  no  longer  to  be  endured.  The  planters 
were  obliged  to  employ  their  labourers  on  the  footing  of  hired 
servants ;  and  the  negroes  were  required  to  labour  for  their  own 
livelihood.  The  amount  of  remuneration  was  not  left  to  indi- 
vidual generosity,  or  private  agreement ;  but  it  was  fixed  by  law 
that  the  cultivators  of  the  land  should  have  for  their  wages,  a 
third  part  of  the  crops  ;  a  large  compensation,  in  a  country 
where  the  chief  productions  are  sugar  and  coffee.  While  this 
ample  encouragement  was  afforded  for  the  excitement  of  indus* 


TOUSSAINT.  119 

try,  penalties  were  at  the  same  time  denounced  for  the  punish- 
ment <»f  idleness. 

These  laws  were  enforced  by  military  power,  for  there  were 
no  civil  authorities  lo  act.  To  the  establishments  of  civil  life, 
the  negroes  in  their  former  condition  must  have  been  entire 
strangers.  A  slave  has  no  country  ;  the  will  of  his  master  is  his 
only  law  ;  the  oveiseer  is  at  once  accuser  and  witness,  judge  and 
jury;  the  driver  is  both  constable  and  beadle.  During  the  war 
there  was  no  place  for  any  but  military  institutions :  and  Tous- 
saint,  when  it  was  necessary  to  enforce  laws  for  the  public  good, 
had  consequently  no  officers  of  civil  justice  to  whom  he  could 
resort.  The  idle  vagrant  who  would  not  work,  and  the  deser- 
ter from  the  army,  therefore  stood  on  the  same  ground  ;  and 
were  equally  liable  to  be  punished,  after  a  fair  trial,  by  a  court 
martial  :  but  so  mild  were  his  punishments,  that  the  severest  one 
for  a  labourer  was  being  compelled  to  enlist  as  a  soldier. 

The  effects  of  these  regulations  were  soon  visible  throughout 
the  country.  So  great  was  the  progress  of  agriculture  from  the 
time  of  their  adoption,  that,  notwithstanding  the  ravages  of  near- 
ly ten  years'  war,  and  other  impediments  which  retarded  its  im- 
provement, the  land  produced  in  the  next  crop  full  one  third  of 
the  quantity  of  sugar  and  coffee  which  it  had  ever  before  yielded 
in  its  most  prosperous  season. 

Obliged  to  work,  but  in  a  moderate  manner,  and  for  hand- 
some wages;  and  at  liberty,  for  the  most  part,  to  choose  their 
own  masters  :  the  plantation  negroes  were  in  general  contented, 
healthful,  and  happy. 

Another  beneficial  consequence  of  the  new  order  of  things 
was  visible  in  the  state  of  the  population.  While  in  Jamaica  and 
other  West  India  islands  in  the  midst  of  peace  and  plenty,  there 
was  a  constant  diminution  among  the  negroes,  and  the  mer- 
chants and  planters  were  confidently  affirming  the  impossibility 
of  keeping  up  their  numbers  without  annual  importations  from 
Afiicaj  in  St.  Domingo,  on  the  contrary,  such  was  the  salutary 
result  of  the  more  moderate  labours  of  the  men  and  the  rest  en- 
joyed by  pregnant  women,  that  the  same  race  of  people  had  con- 
siderably increased,  in  spite  of  war  both  foreign  and  civil,  of  fre- 


120  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

quent  massacres,  and  of  all  the  wants  and  miseries  which  bad 
fallen  upon  that  afflicted  island  for  so  many  years. 

The  state  of  society  at  this  period,  presented  many  interesting 
objects  to  the  contemplation  of  an  attentive  observer.  Some 
situations  of  trust  and  responsibility  were  tilled  by  free  negroes 
and  mulattoes,  who  had  been  in  respectable  circumstances  un- 
der the  old  government;  but  others  were  occupied  by  negroes, 
and  even  by  Africans,  who  had  recently  emerged  from  the  low- 
est condition  of  slavery.  They  were  chiefly  the  able  and  the 
artful,  who,  in  the  chaos  of  revolution,  had  raised  themselves  to 
eminences  of  opulence  and  power. 

The  superior  class  had  airived  at  a  high  degree  of  sumptuous- 
ness  in  their  mode  of  living,  and  possessed  all  the  enjoyments 
to  be  derived  from  rank  or  dignity.  Many  of  their  houses  were 
furnished  with  a  splendour  equalled  by  ^ew  Europeans :  there 
was  a  general  fondness  for  show,  interspersed  with  individual  in- 
stances of  true  taste  and  real  elegance.  Their  etiquette  had 
reached  a  degree  of  refinement  scarcely  to  be  credited  ;  and 
the  services  of  their  domestics  were  performed  with  surprising 
promptitude  and  celerity.  The  most  perfect  ease  was  conspic- 
uous in  every  face,  and  gaiety  of  heart  seemed  to  season  every 
repast.  In  conversation,  no  subject  was  inadmissible,  except 
that  of  their  own  former  condition  ;  the  remembrance  of  which 
could  not  fail  of  exciting  astonishment  at  the  acuteness  of  argu- 
ment and  brilliancy  of  wit  by  which  the  social  circle  was  often 
entertained.  Bui  to  mention  the  claims  of  their  country  would 
kindle  fresh  fire  in  every  eye,  and  call  forth  patriotic  acclama- 
tions from  every  tongue  ;  frequently  accompanied  by  expres- 
sions of  contempt  and  abhorrence  towards  their  traitorous 
brethren,  who  had  deserted  from  the  black  army,  and  abandon- 
ed the  cause  of  general  liberty. 

It  has  been  stated  by  a  writer  who  visited  the  island  at  this 
time,  that  the  men  were,  in  general,  sensible  and  polite,  often 
dignified  and  impressive  ;  that  many  of  the  women  were  elegant 
and  engaging;  that  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  was  on  the  most 
rational  fooling ;  and  that  the  different  shades  of  colour  which 
remained  had  lost  most  of  their  former  hostility.    Many  Ameri- 


STATE    OF    SOCIETY.  121 

cans  had  married  mulatto  ladies,  who  never  appeared  to  feel  the 
least  inferiority  from  their  difference  of  complexion  or  nation. 

After  the  cessation  of  the  war,  the  churches  were  re-opened, 
and  public  worship  was  restored,  according  to  the  forms  of  the 
Romish  communion. 

Dramatic  exhibitions  were  also  re7ived.  Most  of  the  per- 
formers were  blacks,  and  displayed  considerable  theatrical  ta- 
lents. The  performances  were  chiefly  comedy  and  pantomime. 
Some  attention  was  beginning  to  be  paid  to  painting.  Music 
was  universally  practised:  instruments  of  all  kinds  were  used; 
but  stringed  instruments  obtained  the  general  preference. 

The  principal  buiTdings  possessed  much  elegance,  though 
they  were  not  conformed  to  the  laws  of  regular  architecture. 
In  one  of  the  squares  of  Cape  Fran(jois,  the  blacks  had  erected 
a  kind  of  temple  in  memory  of  their  emancipation  from  slavery. 
It  consisted  of  a  circular  dome,  supported  by  seven  pillars  near- 
ly resembling  the  Tuscan  order.  Beneath  the  dome  were  two 
seats,  ascended  by  a  flight  of  steps  extending  all  round  the  build- 
ing. Above  the  seats  was  an  inscription,  on  two  tablets  placed 
upright,  and  side  by  side  ;  between  which  was  fixed  a  pole  with 
a  cap  of  liberty  on  its  top.  This  edifice  was  raised  as  a  tribute 
of  respect  to  Santhonax  and  Polverel,  the  French  commission- 
ers ;  and  an  extract  from  one  of  their  speeches  formed  part  of 
the  inscription. 

The  elegance  of  this  structure,  presented  an  agreeable  con- 
trast to  the  desolation  which  deformed  its  vicinity.  For  the 
greater  part  of  this  once  superb  city  had  been  suffered  to  re- 
main in  ruins  ever  since  its  conflagration  in  1793.  The  wealthy 
blacks  appeared  reluctant  to  restore  its  former  magnificence^  as 
if  in  rebuilding  the  mansions  of  their  fallen  masters,  they  should 
create  for  themselves  new  oppressors. 

The  principal  tavern,  denominated  Hotel  de  la  Republique, 
in  appearance  and  accommodations,  was  but  little  inferior  to  a 
London  cofl"ee-house,  and  sometimes  exhibited  a  superior  de- 
gree of  splendour.  This  house  was  the  usual  resort  of  American 
visitors,  who  were  very  numerous,  and  was  also  much  frequent- 
ed by  the  sable  inhabitants.     Here  the  usual  gradations  of  so- 

17 


122  HISTORY    OF    ST,    DOMINGO. 

ciety  werp  entirely  disreganUd.  Id  the  intercourse  of  the  so- 
cial hour,  all  was  perfect  equality  :  offin-rs  and  privates,  the 
colonel  and  the  drummer,  were  frfquenfly  seen  partaking,  with- 
out distinction,  of  the  ^aine  repast  and  joinino;,  without  reserve, 
in  the  same  amusements.  Toussaint  himself  often  dined  there, 
but  never  sat  at  the  hf-ad  of  the  table  ;  from  an  opinion,  it  was 
said,  that  the  subordinations  of  rank  should  be  confined  to  the 
field. 

The  etiquette  of  the  field,  formed  a  complete  contrast  to  the 
fauiiliailty  of  the  tavern.  Sixty  thousand  men  were  frequently 
reviewed  and  exerciseil  together  on  the  plain  of  the  (.'ape.  On 
these  occasions,  two  thousand  officers  were  seen  in  the  field, 
carrying  arms,  from  the  general  to  the  ensign,  yet  with  the  ut- 
most attention  to  rank ;  without  the  smallest  sytnptom  of 
the  insubordination  indulged  in  the  Ifi^uie  of  the  hotel. 
Each  general  officer  had  a  demi-biigade,  which  went  thiough 
the  manual  exercise  with  a  degree  of  expertness  seldom  wit- 
nessed ;  and  performed  equally  well  several  mancEuvres  appli- 
cable to  their  method  of  fighting.  At  a  whistle,  a  whole  bii- 
gade  would  run  three  or  four  hundred  yards,  then  separating, 
throw  themselves  flat  on  the  ground,  changing  to  their  backs 
or  sides,  keeping  up  a  strong  fire  the  whole  of  the  time,  till 
they  were  recalled  :  then  they  would  form  again,  in  an  instant, 
into  their  wonted  regularity.  This  single  manoeuvre  used  to  be 
executed  with  such  facility  and  precision,  as  totally  to  prevent 
cavalry  from  charging  them  in  bushy  and  hilly  countries.  Such 
complete  subordination,  such  promptitude  and  dexterity, 
prevailed  the  whole  time,  as  would  have  astonished  any  Eu- 
ropean soldier  who  had  the  least  knowledge  of  their  previous 
situation. 

Those  who  formed  the  great  hulk  of  the  people,  and  who 
lived  in  humble  privacy,  discovered  the  same  passions  and  pro- 
pensities which  are  conspicuous  in  negroes  in  all  condiiioos. 
Their  fondness  for  infancy  and  youth,  their  reverence  for  age, 
their  tenderness  for  all  the  relations  of  life,  seemed  rather 
Strengthened  than  imnaired  by  th*>  acquisition  of  liberty.  Their 
favourite  amuseiutnta  were  now  indulged  without  testraint ;  but 


STATE   OF   SOCIETY.  123 

the  good  order  which  generally  prevailed,  rendered  the  interpo- 
sition of  public  justice,  and  the  infliction  of  punishment,  events 
of  rare  occurience. 

Tlioij'^h  the  Spanish  colony  had  been  formally  ceded  to 
Fiance  ill  1795,  and  diflerent  posts  had,  in  consequence,  been 
actually  suiieiideied,  and  occupied  by  the  republican  troops ; 
yet  the  city  of  sit.  Domingo,  the  capital  of  that  part  of  the 
island,  still  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards.  To  obtain 
pos«;ession  of  inat  uietiopolis,  and  to  establish  such  regulations  as 
n)i:j;iif  be  required  on  it-  change  of  government,  Tousisaint  rp- 
solved  to  repair  tljitlur  in  person.  Por  the  puifiose  of  vi.-itiiig 
many  other  places  of  importance,  reviewing  the  troops  in  the 
different  provinces,  appointing  ofiicers  to  command  t|iein,  set- 
tling the  districts,  directing  iht-  distribution  ol  military  stores, 
and  completing  various  other  arrangements  with  greater  accura- 
cy and  success  than  cuuid  be  dose  at  a  distance  ;  he  at  the 
same  time  determined  on  taking  a  regular  journey  throughout 
the  island. 

The  people  were  every  where  prepared  to  regard  a  visit  from 
the  chief  as  a  distinguished  favour."  The  fame  of  his  mariial 
achievements,  and  the  excellence  of  his  general  character,  had 
rendered  him  an  object  of  their  affectionate  admiration  and 
esteem  :  and  his  personal  appearance  and  manners  were  calcu- 
lated to  strengthen  the  universal  attachment.  Of  a  manly  form, 
and  a  little  above  the  middle  stature,  he  had  a  countenance 
bold  and  striking  ;  terrible  to  his  enemies,  but  displaying  the 
most  attractive  sweetness  to  his  friends.  His  manners  and  de- 
portment were,  in  general,  easy  and  familiar  ;  occasionally,  ele- 
gant. When  addressed  by  any  inferior,  he  bent  with  the 
most  obliging  courteousness  ;  and,  without  any  apparent  effort 
of  condescension,  adapted  himself  to  their  peculiar  circum- 
stances. The  general  respect  voluntarily  paid  to  him  in  pub- 
lic, he  was  solicitous  to  return,  or  rather  to  anticipate,  by  the 
most  pleasing  civilities.  His  uniform  was  a  blue  jacket,,  with 
a  broad  red  cape,  red  cuffs,  with  several  rows  of  lace  on  the 
arms,  and  a  large  gold  epaulette  on  each  shoulder;  scarlet 
waistcoat,  and  pantaloons,  with  half  boots  ;  round  hat,  with  a 


.» 


124  HISTORY    OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

national  cockade,  and  a  red  feather :  to  which  was  added,  a  sword 
of  the  largest  size. 

The  reception  he  met  with  in  his  progress  through  the  land, 
was  such  as  might  have  gratified  the  heart  of  the  greatest  po- 
tentate on  earth.  The  satisfaction  inspired  by  his  presence 
was  testified  in  various  forms,  from  the  simple  garland,  to 
more  laborious  and  costly  devices, — from  the  complacent  look 
to  the  loudest  acclamation.  Superb  decorations  covered  the 
principal  houses  as  he  passed  along ;  and  triumphal  arches 
graced  his  entiy  intoall  the  towns.  Wherever  he  went,  the  sin- 
cerest  welcome  was  expressed  in  every  countenance.  The 
military  received  him  in  their  proudest  array  ;  and  the  whole 
population  hailed  his  arrival,  and  blessed  him  at  his  de- 
parture. 

This  tour  proved  highly  beneficial  to  every  part  of  the  island. 
Among  the  goad  effects  which  it  produced,  were — a  more 
uniform  organization  of  the  municipal  governments  ;  a  better 
disposition  of  the  military  force  ;  the  establishment  of  armed 
posts,  foi  ining  a  complete  chain  of  communication  ;  and  provi- 
sions fur  the  advantage  of  trade,  in  the  facilities  afforded  to 
commercial  intercourse  with  the  neighbouring  islands,  and 
the  conliiient  of  America.  Having  accomplished  the  objects 
of  his  journey,  Toussaint  returned  to  Cape  Francois,  where  he 
was  received  with  the  cordiality  and  respect  due  to  his  services 
iu  the  public  cause. 

In  consequence  of  the  total  subversion  of  the  ancient 
colonial  administration,  the  want  of  any  new  system  establish- 
ed in  its  room,  and  the  ahnosi  entire  cessation  of  official  in- 
tercourse with  France,  Toussaint  thought  it  necessary  for  the 
public  interest  to  frame  a  regular  constitution  for  the  future 
government  of  the  island.  In  this  work  he  was  assisted  by 
several  Europeans  of  considerable  talents,  of  whom  the  prin- 
cipal were,  Pascal,  a  descendant  of  the  same  family  as  the 
celebrated  Blaize  Pascal  ;  the  Abbe  Moliere,  and  an  Italian 
ecclesiastic  named  Marinit.  When  the  form  of  constitution 
had  been  prepared,  it  was  submitted  by  Toussaint  to  a  gene- 
ral assembly  of  representatives,  convened  from  every  district : 


INDEPENDENCE  DECLARED.  125 

by  whom  it  was  approved  and  adopted.  It  was  afterwards 
promulgated  in  the  name  of  the  people,  and  the  island  was 
declared  to  be  au  independent  state.  This  proclamation  was 
made  in  due  form  on  the  first  of  July,  J  801. 


CHAP.  viir. 

FROM   JULY    1801,    TO    THE    SEIZURE    AND    TRANSPORTATION    OF 
TOUSSAINT    IN    JUNE    1802. 

Feace  between  France  and  England — The  French  Government  resolves 
on  the  re-conquest  of  St.  Domingo. — Sailing  of  the  expedition. — 
Its  arrival  at  the  island,  and  formation  into  several  ilivisiovs  — 
Capture  of  Fort  Dauphin  by  General  Rochambeau. — Le  Clerc  with 
the  main  body  anites  off  Cape  Frangms. — Correspondence  with 
Christophe  — Proclamation  of  Bonaparte. — Landing  of  the  French. 
— Cape  Frangois  burnt  and  evacuated  by  the  blacks. — Toussaint  in 
the  interior. — His  letter  to  Damage. — Mission  if  Coismon  to  Tons- 
saint. —  Letter  to  him  from  Bonaparte. — His  interview  with  his 
sons  — He  prefers  re.ngning  them  rather  than  betr.iying  his  country. 
-—Le  cierc's  attempts  to  produce  defection  among  the  blarks. — Com- 
mencement of  the  campaign. — Operations  of  the  different  divisions. 
'—Battle  with  Toussaint. —  Defection  of  the  Negroes  — Tou,ssa-nf 
driven  to  the  mountains. — Successful  operations  of  the  French  in 
the  south  — Le  Clerc  orders  tfie  restoration  of  slavery. — The  blccTcs 
renew  the  war  with  fresh  vigour. — Great  reverses  sustained  by  the 
French  — Le  Clerc  deceives  them  by  a  new  proclamation. — Negocia- 
tions, — Peace  vnth  the  negroes. — Retirement  (f  the  chiefs. — Tons.- 
saint  seized  by  order  of  Le  Clerc. — Sent  to  France  with  all  his 
family. — His  separation  from  them — imprisonment — and  death. 

The  autumn  of  the  year  1801,  beheld  every  part  of  St.  Do- 
mingo In  quiet  submission  to  the  authority  of  the  negro  chief, 
and  rapidly  improving  in  wealth  and  happiness  under  his  wise 
administration.  But  this  prosperity  was  soon  to  be  interrupted 
by  calamities  as  tremendously  severe  as  any  which  ever  visited 
that  afflicted  island. 

The  cessation  of  hostilities  between  Great  Britain  and  France, 
which  took  place  on  the  signing  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace 
in  the  mouth  of  October,  left  the  French  navy,  which  for  seve- 


FRENCH   EXPEDITION.  127 

ral  years  ba<l  not  been  able  to  quit  it?  ports  with  impunity,  once 
more  at   liberty   to  traverse   the  ocean.     Bonaparte,   who  now 
held    tlie   supreme   power,  under  the    title    of   First   Consul, 
immediately  determined  on   sending  an  expedition  arross  the 
Atlantic.     If  i)is  real  object  had  been  only  to  restore  to  France 
the  soverei""nty  of  St.  Domingo,  and  tlje  monopoly  of  its  trade, 
it  is  hi<yhly   probable  that  it  might   have   been  effected    by  the 
gentle  means  of  persuasion  and  negociation.     But  this  would 
neither  silence  the  importunity  of  the  expelled  or  fugitive  plan- 
ters, who  languished  after  their  lost  possessions;  nor  satisfy  the 
cupidity  of  mercantile  speculators,   who  contemplated  an  ad- 
vantageous investment  of  capital  :  both  parties  united  in  urging 
the  absolute  recovery  of  the  colony,  the  reinstatement  of  the 
former   proprietors,   and    the  subjugation  of  the   emancipated 
slaves.     Besides,  the  con. pulsion  of  force  was  more  agreeable 
to  Bonaparte's  temper  and   habits  than  the  gentle   influence  of 
peaceful  conciliation.     There  is  a  reason  to  believe  that  be  re- 
garded Toussaint  with  an  eye  of  suspicion,  if  not  of  envy,  and 
considered  him  as  a  rival  to  bis  fame.     He  also  wanted  employ- 
ment for  some    of  his  numerous  army,  and  hoped  to  gain  new 
laurels  which   should    preserve   his  popularity   among  a  nation 
always  fascinated  with   military  glory.     The  preparations  were 
such  as  inspired  all  the  friends  of  the  expedition  with  the  strong- 
est confidence  of  its  success  :  already  in   imagination  they  saw 
the  negroes  deprived  of  their  newly  acquired  freedom,  and  re- 
duced to  tbeir  former  state  of  servitude. 

A  fleet  of  twenty-^ix  ships  of  war  was  collected  in  the  har- 
bours of  Brest,  Ij'Oiient,  and  Rochfort.  On  board  the  fleet 
and  the  transports  which  accompanied  it,  was  embarked  an 
arrjiv  of  twenty-five  thousand  men,  the  flower  of  the  Fiench 
sol  iiery,  and  completely  equipped.  At  the  head  of  the  army 
was  placed  General  Le  derc,  brother-in-law  to  the  First  Con- 
sul, assisted  by  several  of  the  most  able  and  experienced  generals 
that  France  could  produce  for  such  a  service.  One  of  the  di- 
visions was  commanded  by  General  Rocbambeau,  who  had  b*^en 
a  proprietor  of  an  estate  in  the  island,  and  was  well  known  for 
his  attachment  to  the  cause  of  negro  slavery.    The  fleet  was 


128  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

pommanded  by  Admiral  Vlllaret,  who  had  been  in  the  royal 
service  before  the  revohition  ;  and  under  him  were  Kear-adrni- 
ral  Latouche  and  captain  Ma2;on.  To  participate  in  the  ex- 
pected triumphs,  Madame  Le  Clerc  accompanied  her  husband, 
as  did  also  her  younger  brother  Jerome  Bonaparte. 

The  First  Consul,  however,  not  relying  entirely  on  force  for 
the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,  determined  on  employing 
every  method  that  could  be  devised,  tosecure  the  co-operation  of 
Toussaint,  or  at  least  to  prevent  his  active  hostility. 

Sensible  of  the  importance  of  education,  and  not  having  the 
means  of  procuring  at  home  that  instruction  for  his  children 
which  he  thought  necessary  to  qualify  them  for  the  sphere  in 
which  they  were  likely  to  move,  Toussaint  had  sent  his  two 
elder  sons  to  France  for  that  purpose.  These  youths  were  ta- 
ken from  their  studies,  and  sent  on  board  the  fleet,  as  hostages 
for  the  conduct  of  their  father. 

The  fleet  sailed  on  the  14th  of  December,  1801,  and  after  a 
most  prosperous  voyage  arrived  in  the  bay  of  Samana,  on  the 
eastern  coast  of  St.  Domingo,  on  the  28th  of  the  following  month. 
General  Le  Clerc  now  dispatched  three  divisions  of  his  force, 
which  he  wished  to  fall,  like  so  many  sky-rockets,  on  three 
principal  places  of  the  island  nearly  at  the  same  lime.  General 
Kersevan  was  sent  with  one  division  to  the  city  of  St.  Don)lngo. 
Rear-admiral  Latouche  was  ordered  to  carry  another,  under 
General  Boudet,  to  Poit-au  Prince  ;  and  Captain  Magon  to 
land  the  troops,  under  General  Kochambfau  in  Mancenillo 
Bay,  near  Fort  Dauphin.  Le  Clerc  himself  with  the  rest  of 
his  troops  proceeded  to  Cape  Francois,  and  reached  that  har- 
bour on  the  2d  of  February. 

It  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  what  information  Toussaint  had 
obtained,  or  what  precise  opinion  he  had  formed,  respecting 
the  nature  and  design  of  this  expedition.  On  one  band,  it  has 
been  affirmed, — that,  lest  the  news  of  the  armaments  that  were 
preparing  should  alarm  him  and  put  him  on  his  guard,  means 
were  used  to  deceive  him  both  as  to  their  magnitude  and  destina- 
tion ; — that  he  expected  only  such  a  squadron  and  such  a  body 
of  troops,  as  the  French  government  might  naturally  send  in 


ROCHAMBEAU    OCCUPIES    FORT    DAUPHIN.  129 

time  of  peace  to  an  obedient  colony  ; — that  he  supposed  them 
to  come  with  no  other  thaa  friendly  views,  and  by  proclamation 
enjoined  the  negroes  to  receive  them  with  respect,  affection, 
and  confidence  ; — and  that  he  made  no  preparation  for  defence, 
not  even  so  much  as  to  give  the  necessary  orders  to  his  subordi- 
nate generals  who  commanded  in  the  different  towns  on  the 
coast.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  stated,  with  equal  confi- 
dence,— that  he  had  been  aware  of  the  hostile  designs  of  the 
consular  cabinet ;  that  he  liad  obtained  considerable  informa- 
tion of  the  large  force  prepared  for  the  prosecution  of  those 
designs; — that  he  had  been  apprized  of  the  successful  iutrisiues 
of  French  hostility  with  some  of  the  intiabitantsboth  white  and 
black,  who  had  promised  to  assist  the  invaders ; — that  he  had 
exerted  the  vigilance  which  these  circumstances  demanded,  and 
that  to  every  point  where  invasion  was  expected,  or  the  smallest 
signs  of  defection  appeared,  he  had  applied  every  means  in  his 
power  to  prevent  the  advance  of  an  enemy  towards  the  interior 
of  the  island. 

Before  the  other  paris  of  the  armament  could  get  round  to 
their  points  of  attack,  on  the  2d  of  February,  General  Rocham- 
beau  with  his  division  arrived  at  Fort  Dauphin,  and  the  troops 
were  instantly  landed.  No  summons  was  sent,  to  give  the 
poor  colonists  a  chance  of  saving  their  lives  by  submission. 
The  troops  were  immediately  drawn  up  in  battle  array  on  the 
beach.  The  negroes  ran  in  crowds  to  behold  the  strange  sight, 
and,  without  having  the  least  notice  cf  what  was  designed 
against  them,  they  weie  charged  with  the  bayonet;  great  num- 
bers were  killed,  and  the  rest  fled,  leaving  the  French  masters 
of  the  foit. 

On  the  next  day,  the  main  body  of  the  fleet  and  army,  under 
Villaret  and  Le  Clerc,  arrived  off  Cape  Francois,  and  immedi- 
ate preparations  were  made  to  land  and  take  possession  of  the 
town.  But  Christophe,  the  black  general,  who  commanded  at 
this  important  post,  on  the  approach  of  the  fleet,  sent  on  board 
a  mulatto,  who  exercised  the  office  of  post-captain,  to  inform 
the  commander  of  the  expedition,   that  the   general-in-chief 

being  absent  in  the  interior  country,  no  disembarkation  of  any 

18 


130  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO, 

military  force  could  be  permitted  to  take  place,  till  the  return 
of  a  messen2;er  who  had  been  dispatched  to  acquaint  him  with 
the  arrival  of  the  French,  and  to  receive  his  commands; — that 
ifthe  French  should  refuse  to  wait,  and  should  atteajpt  to  force 
a  landing,  all  the  white  inhabitants  would  be  considered  as  hos- 
tages for  their  conduct,  and  that  an  attack  upon  the  town  would 
be  followed  by  its  immediate  conflagration.  General  Le  Clerc, 
thinking  it  necessary  to  accompany  his  demonstrations  of  pow- 
er with  professions  of  kindness,  replied  that  he  would  write  to 
General  Christophe,  and  inform  him  of  the  friendly  intentions 
with  which  he  came.  He  accordingly  wrote  the  following  let- 
ter, which  he  sent  by  one  of  his  own  officers  detaining  the  cap- 
tain of  the  port  as  a  hostage  j  and  the  French  fleet  stood  off  to 
sea : 

"  7Ae  Gencral'in-Chiefofihe^rmyofSt.  Domingo,  Captain- 
General  of  the  Colony,  to  the  General  of  brigade,  Christophe^ 
Commandant  at  the  Cape. 

"  I  leal-n  with  indignation,  Citizen  General,  that  you  refuse  to 
receive  the  French  squadron,  and  the  French  army  that  I  com- 
mand, under  the  pretext  that  you  have  received  no  orders  from 
the  Governor  General.  , 

*'  France  has  concluded  a  peace  with  England ;  and  its  gov- 
ernment sends  to  St.  Domingo,  forces  capable  of  subduing  the 
rebels,  at  least  if  any  such  are  to  be  found  in  the  island.  As  to 
you,  General,  \  confess  it  will  grieve  me  to  account  you  among 
them. 

*'  I  give  you  notice,  that  if  in  the  course  of  this  day,  you  do 
not  surrender  the  furts  Picolet  and  Belair,  with  all  the  batteries 
on  the  coast,  fifteen  thousand  troops  shall  be  disembarked  to- 
morrow at  day-break. 

"  Four  thousand  men  are  at  this  moment  landing  at  Fort 
Liberte  ;  and  eight  thousand  more  at  Port  Republicain. 

"  Herewith  you  will  receive  my  proclamation,  which  express- 
es the  intentions  of  the  French  government;  but,  remember, 
whatever  individual  esteem  your  conduct  in  the  colony  may 


CORRESPONDENCE    WITH    CHRISTOPHE.  131 

have  inspired  me  with,  I  hold  you  responsible  for  what  may 
happen. 

"  I  sahite  you, 
(Signed)  Le  Clerc." 

This  disingenuous  composition  of  conciliation  and  menace 
drew  from  Christophe  the  following  dignified  reply  ;  a  reply  not 
unworthy  of  a  Roman  general  in  the  best  times  of  the  republic  : 

"  Henry  Chrigtophe,    General  of  Brigade,   Commandant  of  the 
Arrondissementofthe  Cape,  to  the  General  in- Chief  Le  Clerc. 

"  Your  aid-decamp,  General,  has  delivered  to  me  your  letter 
of  this  day.  I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  that  I  could  not 
deliver  up  the  forts  and  posts  entrusted  to  my  command,  without 
previous  orders  from  the  governor  general,  Toussaint  Louver- 
ture,  my  immediate  chief,  from  whom  I  hold  the  powers  with 
which  I  am  invested.  1  am  fully  convinced  that  1  have  to  do 
with  Frenchmen,  and  that  you  are  the  chief  of  the  armament 
called  the  expedition  ;  but  I  wait  the  orders  of  the  Governor,  to 
whom  I  have  dispatched  one  of  my  aid-de-camps,  to  acquaint 
him  with  your  arrival,  and  that  of  the  French  army  ;  and  cannot 
permit  you  to  land  until  [  have  received  his  answer.  If  you  put 
in  force  your  threats  of  hostility,  I  shall  make  the  resistance 
which  becomes  a  general  officer  :  and,  should  the  chance  of 
war  be  in  your  favour,  you  shall  not  enter  Cape  Town  till  it  be 
reduced  to  ashes  j  nay,  even  in  the  ruins  1  will  renew  the  com- 
bat. 

You  say,  the  French  government  has  sent  to  St.  Domingo, 
forces  capable  of  reducing  the  rebels,  if  any  such  be  found.  It 
is  your  coming,  and  the  hostile  intentions  you  manifest,  that 
alone  could  create  them  among  a  peaceable  people,  in  perfect 
submission  to  France  :  the  mention  of  rebellion  is  an  argument 
for  our  resistance. 

"The  troops  which  you  say  are  at  this  moment  landing,  I  con- 
sider as  so  many  pieces  of  cards,  which  the  shghtest  breath  of 
wind  will  dissipate. 

"  How  can  you  hold  me  responsible  for  the  event  ?  You  are 
not  my  chief.     I  know  you  not ;  and  can  therefore  make  nu  ac- 


132  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

count  of  you  till  you  are  acknowledged  by  Governor  Toussaint. 
"  As  to  the  loss  of  your  esteem,  General,  I  assure  you  that  I 
desire  not  to  cam  it  at  the  price  you  set  upon  it ;  since  to  pur- 
chase it  1  must  be  guilty  of  a  breach  of  duty. 

1  have  the  honour  to  salute  you. 
(Signed)  H.  Chkistophe." 

The  French  officer  returned  with  this  letter  on  the  next  day, 
the  4(h  of  Februaiy.  A  deputation  froni  the  terrified  inhabi- 
tants, headed  by  the  mayor,  went  on  board  the  fleet,  and  entreat- 
ed the  general  to  take  their  unforlunaie  circumstances  into  con- 
sideration ;  for  that  the  blacks  were  deierniined,  on  the  first 
signal  for  disembarkation,  to  set  fire  to  tiie  city,  and  to  put  all 
the  while  people  to  the  sword.  The  general  received  the  de- 
putation with  great  politeness,  but  dismissed  then)  without  any 
piomise  of  refraining  from  hostile  measures  :  he  only  directed 
them,  on  their  return,  to  lead  the  proclamation  of  the  First  Con- 
sul in  the  town,  and  to  represent  his  kind  intentions  towards  all 
the  inhabitants. 

The  proclamation  was  drawn  up  in  the  same  insidious  style, 
vphich  characterized  many  other  productions  of  the  revolutiona- 
ry cabinet;  being  intended  lo  delude  the  i^iass  of  the  negro 
population  into  a  belief,  that  the  designs  of  the  French  govern- 
ment were  altogether  friendly,  and  that  no  violence  would  be 
employed,  but  in  the  event  of  a  rejection  of  its  offered  fra- 
ternity. 

"Inhabitants  of  St.  Domingo, 

"Whatever  your  origin  or  your  colour,  you  are  all  French  ; 
you  are  all  free,  and  all  equal,  before  God,  and  before  the  Re- 
public. 

"France,  like  St.  Domingo,  has  been  a  prey  to  factions,  torn 
by  civil  commotions,  and  by  foreign  wars.  But  all  has  changed ; 
all  nations  have  embraced  the  French,  and  have  sworn  to  them 
peace  and  amity  :  the  French  people,  too,  have  embraced  each 
other,  and  have  sworn  to  be  all  friends  and  brothers.  Come 
also,  embrace  the  French,  and  rejoice  to  see  again  your  friends 
and  brothers  of  Europe. 


LANDING  OF  LE  CLERC.  13S 

"The  government  sends  you  Captain  General  Le  Clerc  :  he 
brings  with  him  numerous  forces  for  protecting  you  against  your 
enemies,  and  against  the  enemies  of  the  Repuhhc.  If  it  be  said 
to  you,  these  forces  are  destined  to  ravish  from  you  your  Uber- 
ty  ;  answer,  The  Republic  will  not  suffer  it  to  be  taken  from  us. 

*•  Rally  round  the  Captain-General ;  he  brings  you  peace  and 
plenty.  Rally  all  of  you  around  him.  Whoever  shall  dare  to 
separate  himself  from  ihe  Captain-General,  will  be  a  traitor  to 
his  country,  and  the  indignation  of  the  Republic  will  devour 
him,  as  the  fire  devours  your  dried  canes. 
" Done  at  Paii?,  &c. 

(Signed)  "The  First  Consul,  Bonaparte. 

"The  Secretary  of  State,  H.  B.  Maret. 

Le  Clerc  was  not  disposed  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of  dispatch- 
es from  Toussaint,  much  less  for  his  return  in  person  ;  but  was 
rather  willing  to  profit  by  the  absence  of  a  chief  of  his  acknowl- 
edged talents.  He  therefore  only  waited  to  be  informed  that 
Rocliaiiibeau  had  efiVcted  a  landing  at  Fort  Eauphin,  and  was 
ready  to  co-operate.  This  intelhgence  he  re<;eived  on  the  5th 
day  of  the  month,  and  immediately  prepared  to  commence  his 
operations  on  the  day  following. 

To  avoid  the  loss  likely  to  be  sustained  by  disembarking  un- 
der the  guns  of  the  fortifications,  and  in  hope  of  gaining  the 
heights  of  the  Cape  before  the  negroes  could  put  their  threats 
of  fire  and  sword  into  execution,  Le  Clerc  landed  his  troops  at 
Du  Limbe,  a  point  of  land  a  few  miles  to  the  westward.  Villa- 
ret,  early  in  the  morning,  taking  advantage  of  a  favorable  breeze, 
proceeded  towards  the  town,  and  the  rest  of  the  squadron  fol- 
lowed. But  no  sooner  were  the  movements  announced  to  the 
negro  commandant,  than  knowing  the  town  not  to  be  defensible, 
especially  with  the  disaffection  which  he  well  understood  to  be 
generally  prevalent  among  the  white  inhabitants,  he  immediate- 
ly gave  orders  for  setting  fire  to  it  in  various  places.  In  the 
evening,  when  Le  Clerc  came  within  sight  of  it,  he  beheld  it  in 
flames.  The  whole  squadron  anchored  at  the  Mole  in  safety ; 
the  crews  were  immediately  disembarked,  and,  together  with  a 


134  HISTORY   OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

.  body  of  twelve  hundred  troops  under  General   Humbert,  who 

•  had  landed  and  made  a  diversion  in  favour  of  Le  Clerc,  exerted 

themselves  with  great  diligence  in  endeavouring  to  extinguish 

the  flames ;  but  a  few  houses  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  town 

were  all  they  could  save  from  the  general  destrurtion. 

Having  thus  executed  a  menace,  the  fulfilment  of  uhich,  how- 
ever it  may  have  excited  the  censures  and  reproaches  of  disap- 
pointed Frenchmen,  was  perfectly  consistent  with  .  the  laws  of 
defensive  warfare  acknowledged  by  civilized  nations  ;  Christo- 
phe  with  the  troops  under  his  command,  retreated  in  good  order, 
and  without  much  loss.  As  to  the  sanguinary  threat  which  he 
is  said  to  have  issued,  of  massacreing  the  white  inhabitants,  it 
must  be  mentioned  to  his  honour,  that  he  never  gave  any  orders, 
nor  D)ade  the  least  attempt,  for  the  perpetration  of  such  an 
outrage.  In  his  retreat,  he  carried  off  more  than  two  thousand 
of  them  as  hostages;  but  not  one  of  them  was  put  to  death. 

While  these  transactions  were  taking  place,  which  occupied 
scarcely  five  days,  Toussaint  was  in  the  interior  of  the  island,  at 
too  great  a  distance  from  the  coast  to  give  any  timely  assistance 
or  orders  at  either  of  the  points  of  aitack.  As  soon  as  he  was 
apprized  of  the  events  that  had  occurred,  he  lost  no  time  in 
giving  those  directions  which  existing  circumstances  appeared 
to  him  to  require.  The  orders  issued  by  him  to  his  subordinate 
generals,  both  before  and  after  the  invasion  of  the  French, 
were  described  by  the  consular  gazettes  as  exhibiting  indica- 
tions of  cruelty  and  barbarity  beyond  all  example. 

The  same  gazettes  described,  in  most  exaggerated  terms,  an 
insurrection  which  had  taken  place  during  the  preceding  au- 
tumn, and  the  military  executions  which  had  followed.  The 
story  was  related  so  as  to  convey  ideas  of  extreme  barbarity 
and  insubordination  in  the  insurgents,  unrelenting  severity  in 
Toussaint  and  his  friends,  and  a  dreadful  state  of  manners  in 
both.  Not  a  hint  was  given,  of  what  was  indeed  the  truth,  that 
Toussaint's  rigour  on  this  occasion  was  in  pursuance  of  his 
humane  and  determined  purpose,  to  protect  the  French  from 
the  resentment  and  violence  of  his  brethren.  General  Moise, 
and  many  officers  and  troops  under  his  command,  had  revolted. 


CALUMNIES    AGAINST    TOUSSAINT.  135 

not  with  views  hostile  to  Toussaint  and  his  government,  but 
solely  to  indulge  their  vengeance  against  the  whites,  many  of 
whom  they  actually  massacred.  The  insurrection,  however, 
was  soon  quelled ;  and  Toussaint,  in  this  case,  departed  from 
his  characteristic  lenity,  and  became  severe  and  inexorable. 
Moise  was  his  nephew,  his  confidential  friend,  and  his  second  in 
command  ;  yet  he  brought  him,  and  about  thirty  of  his  officers, 
to  a  court  martial  for  their  bloody  conduct ;  and  on  their  con- 
viction, ordered  them,  though  with  the  deepest  concern,  to  be 
publicly  executed  at  the  Cape.  This  sacrifice  of  the  feelings 
of  the  man  to  the  duties  of  the  governor,  he  deemed  absolutely 
necessary,  to  protect  from  further  violence  those  to  whom  his 
faith  and  humanity  were  pledged. 

But  the  agents  of  the  French  government  hesitated  not  at 
the  employment  of  any  calumny,  to  blacken  the  character  of 
the  chief  who  was  regarded  as  the  principal  obstacle  to  the 
success  of  their  invasion  ;  and  whose  destruction  it  was  deter- 
mined to  accomplish,  either  by  force  or  by  fraud.  His  letters 
which  they  intercepted  or  obtained  from  negro  deserters,  were 
affirmed  to  characterize  a  soul  equally  hypocritical  and  atro- 
cious. But  the  impartiality  of  truth  compels  the  conviction 
ihat  these  charges,  unsupported  as  they  are  by  a  tittle  of  evi- 
dence, prove  nothing  more  than  virulent  malice  of  the  accusers. 
The  only  letter  they  thought  proper  to  publish,  of  all  which 
they  pretended  to  have  in  their  possession,  contains  nothing 
inconsistent  with  the  most  humane  and  honourable  mind.  It 
was  written  three  days  after  the  loss  of  Cape  Francois,  and 
addressed 

"  To  Citizen  Domage,  General  of  Bris^ade,  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  district  ofJeremie. 

"My  DEAR  General, 

"  I  send  to  you  my  aid-de-camp,  Chaney,  who  is  the  bearer 
of  the  present  dispatch,  and  will  communicate  to  you  the  busi- 
ness with  which  I  have  char  ed  him. 

•'  The  whites  of  France,  and  of  the  colony,  united  together, 
wish  to  take  away  liberty.     A  great  many  ships  of  war,  and 


I 


136  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

troops,  have  arrived  and  taken  possession  of  the  Cape,  of  Port 
Republicain,*  and  of  Fort  Liberty.  The  Cape,  after  a  vigorous 
resistance,  has  fallen  :  but  the  enemy  has  found  there  little  more 
than  a  plain  of  ashes.  The  forts  have  been  blown  up,  and  every 
thing  is  burned.  The  town  of  Port  Republicain  has  been  de- 
livered up  to  them  by  the  traitor  Age,  general  of  brigade :  and 
the  Port  Bizotton  surrendered  without  firing  a  shot,  through  the 
cowardice  and  treason  of  the  chief  of  battalion.  Bardet,  former- 
ly officer  of  the  South.  The  general  of  division,  J)pssalines, 
supports  at  this  moment  a  cordon  at  Croix  des  Bouquets,  and 
all  our  other  places  are  upon  the  defensive. 

"  As  the  place  of  Jeremie  is  very  strong  from  its  natural  ad- 
vantages, you  will  maintain  yourself  there,  and  defend  it  with 
the  courage  which  I  know  you  possess.  Put  no  confidence  in 
the  whites;  they  will  betray  you  if  they  can.  Their  wish,  evi- 
dently manifested,  is  the  restoration  of  slavery,  i  therefore  give 
you  a  carte  blanche.  Every  thing  that  you  do,  will  be  done 
well.  Raise  the  cultivators  in  mass,  and  make  them  fully  sensi- 
ble of  this  truth,  that  they  must  place  no  confidence  in  those  art- 
ful persons  who  may  have  secretly  received  proclamations  from 
the  white  men  of  France,  and  would  circulate  them  clandestine- 
ly, in  order  to  seduce  the  friends  of  liberty. 

"I  have  given  orders  to  the  general  of  brigade,  Laplume,  to 
burn  the  town  of  Cayes,  the  other  towns,  and  all  the  plains,  if 
they  should  not  be  able  to  resist  the  force  of  the  enemy ;  and 
then  all  the  troops  of  the  different  garrisons,  and  all  the  cultiva- 
tors will  go  to  increase  your  numbers  at  Jeremie.  You  will  main- 
tain a  perfectly  good  understanding  with  General  Laplump.  in 
order  to  execute  well  and  with  ease  whatever  may  be  necessa- 
ry. You  will  employ  all  the  female  cultivators  in  planting  pro- 
visions in  great  quantities. 

"  Endeavor,  as  much  as  possible,  to  acquaint  me  with  your 
situation. 

"  I  rely  entirely  upon  you,  and  leave  you  wholly  to  your  own 
*  The  revolutionaiy  name  for  Port-au-Prince, 


PROPOSALS    TO  TOUSSAINT.  137 

discretion  to  do  every  thing  that  may  be  requisite  to  free  us 
from  the  most  horrihlt'  yoke  with  which  we  are  im  aleiied. 
"Health  and  friendship. 
(Signed)  "Toussaint  Louverture." 

All  the  divisions  of  tlie  French  force  having  made  good  their 
landing,  Le  Clerc'thoughl  it  was  the  prjper  lime,  before  any  at- 
tempt to  penetrate  into  the  interior,  to  make  trial  of  ihe  scheme 
intended  to  be  practised  upon  the  feelings  of  Toussaint.  Bona- 
parte's letter  to  him  was  now  to  be  delivered,  a,nd  an  interview 
was  to  be  effected  between  him  and  his  two  sons,  whom  the 
caresses  of  the  First  Consul,  and  the  enjoyment  of  every  indul- 
gence, had  impressed  with  a  belief  that  it  was  the  interest  of 
their  father  to  comply  with  the  proposal  to  be  made  to  him  by 
Le  Clerc. 

From  the  smoking  ruins  of  Cape  Francois,  an  emissary  was 
accordingly  dispatched  to  Ennery,  Toussaint's  country  resi- 
dence, about  ten  leagues  from  the  Cape.  The  man  commis- 
sioned to  deliver  Bonaparte's  letter,  and  to  introduce  the  two 
youths  to  their  father,  was  Coisnon,  their  tutor  ;  who  had  ac- 
companied them  from  France,  and  was  one  of  the  chief  and 
confidential  agents  in  this  expedition.  His  orders  were  to  let 
his  pupils  see  and  embrace  their  parents,  but  not  to  suffer  them 
to  remain,  unless  their  father  would  promise  entire  aoquie.icence 
in  the  wishes  of  the  First  Consul.  If  Toussaint  should  accept 
the  offers  niade  to  him,  he  was  to  be  required  immediately  to 
repair  to  the  Cape,  to  receive  the  commands  of  Le  Clerc.  and 
to  become  his  lieuienant-g^'neral :  hut  if  he  should  be  found 
proof  against  all  the  attacks  of  fraud  and  sophistry,  his  j^ons  were 
to  be  torn  from  his  arms,  and  brought  back  again  as  hostag«;s. 
If  nothing  else  could  move  him,  ii  was  hoped  that  the  yearnings 
of  parental  affection  vvould  overcome  the  resistance  of  patrint- 
ism,  and  bend  his  otherwise  inflexible  virtue.  But  to  provide  for 
the  event  of  his  reJHcting  the  fraudulent  proposals,  a  passport 
was  obtained  frotn  him,  or  his  lieutenant-general ;  and  the  faith 
of  a  soldier,  who-ie  word  had  never  been  violated,  was  engaged 
for  the  lelurn  botU  of  the  envoy  and  of  his  pupils. 

19 


138  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

When  Coisnon  and  the  two  youths  reached  Ennery,  Tous- 
saini  was  absent,  having  been  called  on  urgent  public  business 
to  a  distant  part  of  the  island.  His  faithful  wife  received  her 
two  sons,  as  an  affectionate  and  tender  mother  might  be  expec- 
ted to  welcome  chddren,  who  had  been  separated  from  her  for 
seven  or  eight  years ;  and,  improved  both  in  stature  and  ac- 
complishments, were  now  returned  in  all  the  vigour  and  loveli- 
ness of  youth,  and  one  of  them  fast  advancing  towards  manhood. 
She  invited  their  tutor,  whom  her  unsuspecting  heart  regarded 
with  misplaced  gratitude  and  respect,  lo  wait  the  return  of  Tous- 
saint ;  an  invitation  which  the  ciafty  Frenchman  readily  accep- 
ted, in  hopes  of  persuading  her  to  becou)e  his  auxiliary  in  the 
negociations  with  her  husband.  He  professed  to  her,  as  he 
had  declared  to  all  the  negroes  whom  he  met  on  bis  journey, 
that  the  Consul  had  no  designs  whatever  against  their  freedom, 
but  wishes  only  for  peace,  a  revival  of  tlieir  colonial  relation  to 
France,  and  submission  to  the  authority  of  the  republic.  The 
fond  mother  was  ready  to  believe  all  his  declarations;  she  at 
least  wished  that  her  husband  with  his  superior  knowledge  and 
judgment  might  see  reason  lo  confide  in  these  assurances  of 
peace  and  friendship. 

Justice  to  the  character  of  the  negro  chief,  requires  it  to  be 
stated,  that  the  account  of  this  mission  furnished  by  Coisnon 
himself,  the  only  account  indeed  which  has  ever  been  given  to 
the  world,  places  it  beyond  all  doubt,  that,  if  Toussaint  had 
any  object  in  view  beyond  securing  liberty  and  happiness  for 
himself  and  his  brethren,  it  was  neither  known  nor  suspected  by 
the  wife  of  his  bosom. 

A  courier  had  been  immediately  dispatched  to  inform  Tous- 
saint of  the  arrival  of  his  children,  accompanied  by  a  messenger 
from  the  Fiist  Consul  with  offers  of  the  most  ad\antageous 
nature.  His  distance  from  home  was  so  great,  that  though  he 
set  out  on  his  return  immediately  on  receiving  this  intelligence, 
and  travelled  with  more  than  his  usual  rapidity,  he  did  not 
an-ive  at  Ennery  till  after  the  middle  of  the  second  night. 

The  two  sons  ran  to  meet  their  father,  and  he,  with  emotions 
too  big  for  utterance,  clasped  them  silently  in  his  arms.     Few, 


PROPOSALS    TO    TOUSSAINT.  139 

it  is  to  be  hoped,  are  the  partakers  of  our  coiDmon  nature,  who 
on  witnessing  the  enibiacfs  and  tears  of  parental  and  filial  sen- 
sibility, couJd  have  proceeded,  ai  It  asi  wiihuut  powerful  relent- 
ings  of  heart,  to  eseculL'  the  coniniission  with  which  Coisnon 
was  charged.  But  this  cold  blooded  emissary  of  France  beheld 
the  scene  with  a  barbarous  apathy,  worthy  of  the  cause  in  which 
he  was  employed.  Wht  n  the  liist  burst  of  paternal  feeling 
was  over,  Toussaint  stretched  out  his  aims  to  hiui  whom  he  re- 
garded with  complacency  as  the  tutor  of  his  children,  and  their 
conductor  to  the  roof  and  embraces  of  their  parents.  This  was 
the  moment  which  Coisnon  thought  most  favourable  to  the  per- 
petration of  his  treacherous  design.  "  The  father  and  the  two 
sons,"  says  he,  "threw  themselves  into  each  others' arms.  I 
saw  them  shed  tears,  and  wishing  to  take  advantage  of  a  period 
which  I  conceived  to  be  favourable,  I  slopped  him  at  the  mo- 
ment when  he  stretched  out  his  arms  to  me." 

Retiring  fro£n  the  embrace  of  Toussaint,  Coisnon  assailed 
him  in  a  set  speech,  persuading  him  to  accede  to  the  overtures 
of  the  Consul ;  describing  in  glowing  colours  the  advantages  to 
be  gained  by  joining  the  French  standard,  and  denouncing  the 
most  implacable  hostility  and  dreadful  vengeance  as  the  inev^a- 
ble  consequence  of  a  refusal ;  expatiating  on  the  hopelessness  of 
any  efforts  to  resist  armies  which  had  conquered  the  legions  of 
combined  Europe;  and  which  now  had  no  enemy  to  contend 
with  but  the  rebels  of  St.  Domingo ;  declaring  that  no  designs 
were  entertained  of  infringing  the  liberty  of  the  blacks ;  and 
desiring  him  to  reflect  on  the  situation  of  his  children,  who, 
unless  he  would  submit,  were  immediately  to  be  carried  back  to 
the  Cape,  never  more  perhaps  to  gladden  the  hearts  of  their 
parents.  The  orator-  concluded  by  putting  into  Toussaint's 
hands  a  letter  from  General  Le  Clerc,  and  the  following  epistle 
from  the  First  Consul. 

•'  To    Citizen    Toussaint  Louverture,    GeKeral-in- Chief  of  the 
Army  of  at.  Domingo. 

''Citizen-General, 
"  Peace  with  England  and  all  the  powers  of  Europe,  which 


140  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

places  the  Republic  in  the  first  degree  of  greatness  and 
power,  enables  at  the  same  time,  the  government  to  direct  its 
attention  to  St  Domingo.  We  send  thither  Citizen  Le  Clcrc, 
our  brother-in-law,  in  quality  of  Captain- General,  as  first  magis- 
trate of  the  colony.  He  is  accompanied  with  the  necessary 
forces,  to  make  the  sovereignty  of  the  French  people  respect- 
ed. Jt  is  under  these  circumstances  that  we  are  disposed  to 
hope  that  you  will  prove  to  us,  and  to  all  France,  the  sincerity 
of  the  sentiojents  which  you  have  constantly  expressed  in  the 
different  lelltjs  you  have  wiilten  tons.  We  have  conceived 
for  you  esteem,  and  we  wish  to  recognize  and  proclaim  the  great 
servic-es  you  have  rendered  to  the  French  people.  If  their  co- 
lours fly  on  St.  Donjini;o,  it  is  to  you,  and  your  brave  blacks, 
that  we  owe  it.  Called  by  your  talents,  and  the  force  of  cir- 
cuujstances,  to  the  chief  command,  you  have  terminated  the 
civil  war,  pni  a  stop  to  the  persecutions  of  some  ferociou-  men, 
and  restored  to  honour  the  religion  and  the  worship  of  God,  from 
whom  all  things  come. 

*'  The  situation  in  which  you  were  placed,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  enemies,  and  without  the  mother  country  being  able  to 
succour  or  sustain  you,  has  rendered  legitimate  the  articles  of 
that  constitution  which  otherwise  could  not  be  so.  But,  now 
that  circumstances  are  so  happily  changed,  you  will  be  the  first 
to  render  homage  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  nation,  whicli  reck- 
ons ytiu  among  the  number  of  its  illustrious  citizens,  by  the 
services  you  have  rendered  to  it,  and  by  the  talents  and  the 
force  of  character  with  which  nature  has  endowed  you.  A 
contrary  conduct  would  be  irreconcileable  with  the  idea  we 
have  conceived  of  you.  It  would  deprive  you  of  your  nume- 
rous claims  to  the  gratitude  and  the  good  offices  of  the  Repub- 
lic, and  would  dig  under  ycmr  feel  a  precipice,  which,  while  it 
swallowed  you  up,  would  contribute  to  the  misery  of  those  brave 
blacks,  whose  courage  we  love,  and  whom  we  should  be  sorry  to 
punish  tor  rebellion. 

"  We  have  made  known  to  your  children,  and  to  their 
preceptor,  the  sentiments  by  which  we  are  animated.  VI  e 
send  them  back  to  you.     Assist  with  your  counsel,  your  in- 


Bonaparte's  letter  to  toussaint.  141 

fluence,  and  your  talents,  the  Captain-General.  What  can 
you  desire  ^ — the  freedom  of  tlie  blacks  ?  You  know  that 
in  all  the  countries  we  have  been  in,  we  have  given  it  to  the 
people  who  had  it  not.  Do  you  desire  consideration,  honours, 
fortune  ?  It  is  not  afler  the  services  you  have  rtndeied,  the 
services  you  can  still  render,  and  with  the  personal  estinjation 
we  have  for  you,  that  you  ought  to  be  doubtful  with  respect  to 
your  consideration,  your  fortune,  and  the  honours  that  auait 
you. 

"  Make  known  to  the  poople  of  St.  Domi/jgo.  tl^at  the 
solicitude  which  Fiance  has  always  evinced  for  their  happi- 
ness, has  often  been  rendered  impotent  by  the  imperious 
circumstances  of  war;  ihat  if  men  came  from  the  conti- 
nent to  nourish  factions,  t.'iey  were  the  produce  of  those 
factions  which  destroyed  the  ccmniry  :  that  in  future,  peace, 
and  the  power  of  the  government,  ensure  their  prospfrity 
and  freedom.  Tell  them,  that  if  liberty  be  to  them  the  first 
of  wants,  they  cannot  enj\>y  it  but  with  the  title  of  French 
citizens ;  and  that  every  act  contrary  to  the  interests  of  the 
country,  the  obedience  they  owe  to  the  government,  and  to  the 
Captain-General  who  is  the  delegate  of  it,  would  be  a  crime 
against  the  national  sovereignty,  which  would  eclipse  their  ser- 
vices, and  rendei  St.  Donjingo  the  theatre  of  a  cruel  war,  in 
which  fathers  and  children  would  massacre  each  other. 

"  And  you.  General,  remember,  that  if  you  are  the  first  of 
your  colour  that  attained  such  great  power,  and  distinguibhed 
himself  by  his  bravery  and  his  military  talents,  you  are  also, 
before  God  and  us,  the  principal  person  responsible  for  their 
conduct. 

"  If  there  be  disaffected  persons,  who  say  to  the  individuals 
that  have  home  apiincipgil  part  in  the  troubles  of  St.  D«Hningo, 
that  we  are  coming  to  ascertain  what  they  have  done  duiing 
the  times  of  anarchy,  assure  them  that  we  shall  take  cognizance 
of  their  conduct  only  in  this  last  ciirumstance  ;  and  that  we  shall 
not  recur  to  the  past,  but  to  find  out  the  traits  that  may  have 
distinguished  them  in  the  war  carried  on  against  the  Spanish  and 
English,  who  have  been  our  enemies. 


142  HISTORY   OT    ST.    DOMINGO. 

"  Rely  without  reserve,  on  our  esteem,  and  conduct  yourself 
as  one  of  the  principal  citizens  of  the  greatest  nation  in  the 
world  ought  to  do. 

"  The  First  Consul,  Bonaparte." 

Isaac,  the  eldest  son,  next  addressed  his  father,  representing 
the  great  kindness  with  which  bis  brother  and  himself  had  been 
treated  by  Bonaparte,  and  the  high  esteem  and  regard  which 
the  consul  professed  for  Toussaint  and  his  family.  The  young- 
er son  added  something  that  he  had  been  taught  to  the  same 
effect;  and  both  with  artless  ehjquence  of  their  own,  endeav- 
oured to  win  their  father  to  a  purpose,  of  the  true  nature  and 
probable  consequences  of  which  they  had  no  suspicion.  To  their 
persuasions  were  added  the  tears  and  entreaties  of  their  distressed 
mother.  Toussaint  appeared  to  hesitate  amidst  these  tender 
solicitations.  His  features  seemed  to  indicate  an  inward  con- 
flict of  passion  and  principle.  Coisnon  observed  these  appear- 
ances with  savage  pleasure,  and  began  to  anticipate  a  victory. 
With  more  zeal  than  caution,  he  now  suggested  the  necessity  of 
Toussaint's  immediately  hastening  to  the  Cape  to  join  General 
Le  C'lerc.  Confirmed  in  his  suspicions  of  the  snare  that  wJis  laid 
for  him,  Toussaint  suddenly  composed  his  agitated  countenance, 
gently  disengaged  himself  from  the  embraces  of  his  wife  and 
children,  took  the  tutor  into  another  apartment,  and  gave  him 
this  dignified  decision: — "Take  back  my  children,  since  it 
must  be  so.  I  will  be  faithful  to  my  brethren  and  my  God." 
Finding  all  bis  eloquence  unavailing,  Coisnon  endeavoured  to 
draw  Toussaint  into  a  negociation  with  General  Le  Clerc  ;  and 
Toussaint,  ready  to  treat  upon*  any  terms  by  which  the  direful 
fate  intended  for  his  brethren  might  be  avoided  without  the 
horrors  of  war,  promised  to  send  an  answer  to  the  French 
general's  letter.  He  would  not,  however,  prolong  the  painful 
domestic  scene  by  staying  to  write  it  at  Ennery,  nor  would  he 
risk  another  sight  of  his  children,  but  within  two  hours  from 
the  time  of  his  arrival,  he  mounted  bis  horse  again,  and  rode  to 
the  camp.  On  the  next  day,  he  returned  a  formal  answer  to 
Le  Clerc's  letter,  and  sent  it  by  the  tutor  of  his  younger  sons, 


FIRMNESS    OF   TOUSSAINT.  143 

a  Frenchman  of  the  name  of  Granville,  who  overtook  Coisnon 
and  his  pupils  on  their  way  to  the  Cape.  Toussaint's  answer 
produced  a  reply  from  Le  Clerc  ;  and  a  further  correspondence 
took  place  between  these  two  generals,  which  occupied  several 
days ;  a  truce  being  agreed  upon  for  thai  puipose,  which  Le 
Clerc  expected  would  terminate  in  a  p<  ace  * 

The  truce  having  expired  without  any  prospect  of  Tous«aint's 
submission  being  obtained  by  negociation,  Le  Clerc  became 
in)patient  of  delay  ;  and  upcjn  the  arrival  of  Admiral  Gapthea- 
ume  with  two  thousand  three  hundred  troops,  and  in  the  ex- 
pectation of  Admiral  Linois  with  a  further  reinforcement,  he 
determined  on  an  instant  renewal  of  hostilities  with  all  possible 
vigour. 

On  the  17th  of  February  he  issued  a  proclamation,  in  which 
he  declared  "  General  Toussaint  and  General  Christophe"  to 
be  "  put  out  of  the  protection  of  the  law  ;"  and  ordered  *'  all 
citizens  to  pursue  them,  and  to  treat  them  as  the  eneniies  of  the 
French  republic."  The  proclamation  was  followed  by  a  renew- 
al of  the  war  in  all  parts  of  the  island  ;  and  the  adoption  of 
every  artifice  that  French  ingenuity  could  devise,  to  procure 
defection  among  the  black  troops,  and  among  the  inhabitants  in 
general. 

Le  Clerc  knew  that  it  was  more  easy  to  seduce  the  multitude 
than  to  deceive  men  who  had  been  accustomed  to  govern  ;  and 
that  the  lower  classes  in  all  countries  often  become  discontent- 
ed with  their  rulers,  when  tliey  feel  the  pressure  of  those  evils 
which  war,  though  defensive  and  necessary,  must  always  pro- 
duce. He  was  also  aware,  that  the  labouring  negroes  had  very 
reluctantly  subniitted  to  the  industry  required  from  them,  and 
had  not  been  altogether  satisfied  with  Toussaint  for  imposing 
restraints  upon  idleness,  and  inflicting  punishment  on  vice.  He 
therefore  resolved  to  adopt  every  method  likely  to  promote  the 
disaffection  of  the  cultivators,  or  at  least  to  obtain  their  neutra- 
lity in  the  contest. 

He  cautiously  refrained,  at  first,  from  attempting  any  change 

*  For  a  copy  of  the  answer  said  to  bave  been  addressed  by  Toussaint  to  Bona 
parte,  see  Appendix  It. 


144  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

in  the  condition  of  the  labouring  negroes,  in  the  districts  occu- 
pied by  his  troops.  Though  be  was  accompanied  by  many  of 
their  former  n)a<ters,  to  whom  the  consul  had  promised  the 
restoration  of  their  estates,  not  a  hint  was  given  of  the  restora- 
tion of  slavery  and  the  resumption  of'  the  cart  whip.  The 
general  published  in  his  own  name,  and  in  that  of  the  consul, 
soleir)n  declarations,  that  the  freedom  of  all  the  inhabitants  of 
St.  r)on)ingo.  of  all  colours,  should  be  preserved  inviolate  5 
while,  in  the  same  publications,  he  accused  Toussaint  and  his 
adherents  of  ambition,  and  endeavoured  to  fix  upon  them  the 
blame  of  all  the  calainities  that  were  nbout  to  fall  upon  the 
colony.  To  corrupt  the  fidelity  of  the  black  soldiers,  and  es- 
pecially of  their  generals  and  officers,  he  held  out  the  most 
tempting  ofi*ers  of  immediate  employment  and  preferment  in 
the  service  of  the  republic  ;  and  a  few  who  had  deserted  the 
cause  of  their  country  and  joined  the  French  on  their  first  land- 
ing, were  promoted  to  important  commands,  and  caressed  in 
the  most  flattering  manner. 

To  these  nefarious  arts,  as  well  as  to  the  prowess  of  his  troops, 
was  Le  Clerc  indebted  for  successes  which  were  not  inconside- 
rable. Cimsidering  the  di>advantages  of  the  country,  the 
French  soldiers  fought  with  great  courage  and  perseverance ; 
but  if  they  had  not  been  powerfully  assisted  by  negro  allies, 
and  if  the  cultivators  had  not  been  so  generally  induced  to  re- 
main quiet  spectators  of  the  war,  the  invaders  would  have  found 
it  much  more  difficult,  if  not  altogether  impossible,  to  advance 
far  fiom  the  coast. 

Toussaint  prepared  for  a  conflict  more  obstinate  and  terrible 
than  any  that  he  had  yet  experienced.  Expecting  the  princi- 
pal exertions  of  the  French  to  be  made  in  the  northern  part  of 
the  island,  where  they  had  fixed  their  head-quarters,  he  went 
with  a  body  of  chosen  troops  and  foruied  a  camp  at  Breda. 
Here  he  remained  for  some  time,  waiting  the  approach  of  Le 
Clerc. 

The  negro  troops  were  in  a  state  of  admirable  discipline. 
They  were  all  versed  in  the  management  of  artillery,  but 
chiefly  excelled  in  the  use  of  the  bayonet.    Their  musket? 


MOVEMENT   OF    THE    FRENCH    FORCES.  143 

were  of  extraordinary  length  j  and  with  bayonets  fixed,  their 
infantry  were  superior  to  an  equal  number  of  cavalry  or  artil- 
lery. Their  mode  of  warfare  was  dictated  by  the  nature  of 
their  country.  They  would  frequently  place  whole  lines  in  am- 
bush, sometimes  reaching  from  one  post  to  another,  and  some- 
times extending  to  a  considerable  distance  from  each  wing  of 
a  camp.  By  their  astonishing  celerity,  their  enemies  were  often 
disconcerted  and  thrown  into  disorder,  and  sometimes  when  the 
French  thought  themselves  on  the  point  of  a  victory,  detach- 
ments in  ambush  suddenly  made  their  appearance,  and  mortifi- 
ed them  Vfhb  a  defeat. 

On  the  17th  of  February,  the  day  on  which  Le  Clerc  issued 
his  warlike  proclamation,  the  campaign  actively  commenced. 
Orders  having  been  given  for  a  junction  of  all  troops  landed  in 
the  northern  province,  the  division  of  General  Desfourneaux 
advanced  to  the  Limbe,  that  of  General  Hardy  to  the  Grand 
Boucamp  and  the  Mornes,  and  that  under  General  Kucham- 
beau  against  La  Tannerie  and  the  wood  of  L'Ance.  A  small 
corps,  composed  of  the  garrisons  of  the  Cape  and  Fort  Dau- 
phin, advanced  against  St  Luzanne,  Le  Tron,  and  Valliere. 
These  divisions  had  to  contend  with  great  disadvantages  of 
ground,  and  were  much  annoyed  by  the  movements  of  the 
blacks,  who  concealed  themselves  in  ihe  forests  which  bordered 
the  vallies,  and  who  had  a  secure  retreat  in  the  fastnesses.  The 
columns,  however,  obtained  possession  of  the  positions  which 
they  had  been  ordered  to  occupy. 

On  the  ISth,  the  three  divisions  made  a  further  movement, 
and  encamped  near  Plaisance,  atDondon  and  St.  Raphael.  On 
the  19th,  that  of  Desfourneaux  took  possession  of  Plaisance 
without  resistance  ;  the  black  commander  of  the  district  aban- 
doning the  cause  of  his  country,  and  joining  the  French  with 
two  hundred  cavalry  and  three  hundred  infantry.  General 
Hardy's  division,  at  the  same  time,  made  themselves  masters  of 
Marmelade,  which  was  defended  by  General  Christophe  :  who 
was  induced  to  evacuate  the  place  in  consequence  of  tlae  loss  of 
the  Morne  at  Borspen  ;  which  the  treachery  of  the  comman- 
dant had  previously  given  up  to  General  Hardy.     Christophe 

20 


146  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

retreated  in  good  order,  with  twelve  hundred  troops  of  the  line, 
besides  a  con-^iderable  irregular  force.  On  the  same  day, 
General  Rochatnbeau  took  up  his  position  at  St.  Michael,  where 
he  found  but  little  resistance,  though  it  was  defended  by  four 
hundred  njen. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  blacks  under  General  Maurepas  had 
gained  some  advantage  over  General  Hui-'bert.  Le  Clerc  was, 
therefore,  very  desirous  of  dislodging  that  general  from  the 
entrenched  post  which  he  occupied  near  Port  Paix ;  and 
detached  General  Debelle  for  that  purpose.  But  in  this  at- 
tempt, on  the  20lh  of  February,  the  French  experienced  a  re- 
pulse, and  were  compelled  to  retreat  with  considerable  loss. 

General  Boudet,  who  had  been  ordered  to  advance  from 
Port-au-Prince,  marched  against  La  Croix  des  Bouquets,  which 
on  his  approach  the  negrues  iuinif  diattly  set  on  fire  and  desert- 
ed. Dessalines,  the  black  general  who  commanded  in  that  dis- 
trict, made  a  rapid  movement  across  the  mountains,  and  set 
fire  to  Leogane  in  the  sight  of  a  frigate  which  the  French  ad- 
miral had  dispatched  for  its  preservation.  The  disappoint- 
ments thus  experienced  by  the  French,  were  partly  compensa- 
ted by  the  accession  of  an  eminent  black  chief,  La  Plume, 
who  subniitted  to  General  Boudet,  vviin  all  the  troops  under  his 
command. 

On  the  22d,  the  divisions  of  Desfourneaux  and  Hardy  advan- 
ced against  a  fort  near  Plaisance,  which  had  just  been  abandon- 
ed by  La  Plume.  Christophe,  in  order  to  cover  an  in)portant 
depot  of  the  blacks,  attempted  to  prevent  this  movement  of  the 
French,  but  was  obliged  to  content  himself  with  cutting  off  part 
of  their  force,  and  retiiing  to  Bayannai.  He  still,  however, 
continued  to  act  on  the  defensive,  and,  after  several  skirmishes, 
retreated  to  Gonaives. 

On  the  24th,  General  Rochambeau,  with  his  division,  enter- 
ed the  ravine  a  -  Couleuvre,  where  Toussaint,  with  his  guard, 
consisting  of  fifteen  hundred  chosen  and  tried  grenadiers,  four 
hundred  dragoons,  and  twelve  hundred  other  troops,  had  taken 
a  strong  position,  and  waitf  d  to  recei/e  them.  This  was  the 
only  battle  with  troops  led  into  action  by  Toussaint  himself,  of 


DEFECTION  AMONG  THE  BLACKS.        147 

which  his  enemies  have  ihouglit  proper  to  give  anv  description. 
Ttieir  account  is,  that  it  was  a  combat  of  man  to  man  ;  and  that 
the  blacks  fought  with  great  courage  an^  obstinacy,  but  at 
length  were  obliged  to  retreat,  leaving  eight  bundled  of  their 
number  dead  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  blacks  had  not  yet 
commenced  the  publication  of  gazettes,  or  they  might  with 
equal  accuracy  have  attributed  a  retreat  to  the  French.  The 
truth  is,  that  after  a  hard  fought  day,  in  which  both  armies  and 
their  commanders  had  put  forth  all  their  energies  of  courage  and 
skill,  and  the  ranks  on  both  sides  had  been  thinned  by  an  im- 
mense slaughter,  neither  party  seemed  to  be  in  a  condition  to 
contend  for  the  honour  of  remaining  masters  of  the  field  :  Tous- 
saint  retired  to  the  banks  of  La  Petit  Riviere,  and  Le  Clerc  to 
Gonaives. 

In  Le  Clerc's  despatches,  dated  two  days  after  this  battle,  he 
says  ; — "  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  see  the  country,  in  order 
to  be  enabled  to  form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  difficulties  which 
it  presents  at  every  step.  1  have  never  seen  in  the  Alps  any  ob- 
stacles equal  to  those  with  t  hich  it  fibounds." 

On  the  27th,  Gent-ral  Boudet  was  master  of  St.  Marc  ;  but 
Maurepas  still  retaining  his  positions,  which  gave  him  the  com- 
mand of  that  district.  Le  Clerc  prepared  to  concentrate  his 
force,  with  the  intention  of  compelling  him  to  surrender. 
When  he  had  taken  the  necessary  measures  fur  this  attempt,  he 
was  prevented  from  the  attack  by  an  overture  from  Maurepas, 
which  terminated  in  his  submission  and  that  of  all  the  troops 
under  his  command,  on  conriition  that  himself  and  his  officers 
should  be  continued  in  their  rank  Maurepas  had  with  him  two 
thousand  regular  troops,  and  seven  pieces  of  cannon. 

So  powerfully  did  the  hostilities  carried  on  in  various  quarters 
at  once,  by  the  French  and  their  sable  confederates,  assist  the 
insidious  offers  ind  promises  of  Le  Clerc.  that  most  of  the  ne- 
gro troops  who  still  adhered  to  Toussaint  began  to  be  weary  of 
the  contest,  and  every  day,  almost,  some  leading  man  among 
them  went  over  to  the  enemy.  So  many  of  the  regular  troops 
had  been  induced  to  join  the  French,  or  at  least  to  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  so  great  a  proportion  of  the  rest  had  been  killed 


148  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO* 

in  action,  that,  by  the  end  of  the  month  of  February  in  which 
the  war  began,  the  black  generals  were  chiefly  supported  by  such 
of  the  cultivators  as  the  influence  of  Toussaint  could  preserve 
from  French  delusion,  and  engage  to  fight  in  the  cause  of  their 
own  freedom. 

But  these  men  formed  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  whole 
population  ;  and  were,  besides,  but  inexpert  soldiers,  not  having 
been  previously  taught  the  military  exercise,  and  being  very 
batily  armed.  These  cultivators  too  began  to  desert  the  stan- 
dard of  their  chief,  when  he  was  obliged  to  retire  into  the  inte- 
rior of  the  island;  where,  with  only  a  few  hundred  followers, 
he  rapidly  removed  from  one  fastness  to  another,  contending 
with  innumerable  difficulties,  and  enduring  a  variety  of  hard- 
ships. 

Yet  even  in  this  depressed  state  of  his  affairs,  the  constancy 
of  Toussaint  did  not  forsake  him.  Though  unable  to  meet  his 
enemies  in  the  field,  he  was  still  unconquered.  While  the  inva- 
deis  were  harassing  themselves  by  forced  marches,  and  contend- 
ing fur  positions  untenable  or  useless,  he  and  his  followers 
changed  their  situation  at  pleasure,  never  being  overtaken  in  a 
retreat,  or  surprised  on  a  march,  but  frequently  falling  on  their 
enemies  when  no  apprehension  was  entertained  of  their  ap- 
proach, and  filling  them  with  consternation  and  disn)ay. 

VV  ith  the  remembrance  of  what  had  occurred,  and  the  experi- 
ence he  must  have  acquired,  in  the  course  of  a  war  with  for- 
mer invaders,  it  was  nol  urmatural  for  Toussaint  to  calculate  on 
the  probabiiify  that  the  French,  with  all  the  supplies  they  could 
obtain,  would  in  time  exhaust  themselves.  Driven  as  his  forces 
had  been  from  the  various  points  on  the  coast,  and  much  as  their 
numbers  had  been  diminished  by  desertion  and  death;  yet 
the  natural  impracticability  of  the  situation,  the  constitution 
of  the  negroes  inured  to  the  climate,  the  desultory  mode  of 
warfare  which  they  practised,  were  resources  which  still  remain- 
ed, and  which  he  might  hope  would  ultimately  bafile  all  their 
enemies.  And  if  any  thing  in  the  conduct  of  the  French,  since 
their  landing  had  excited  his  conjecture,  that  they  nright  be  be- 
trayed into  a  premature   developement  of  the  real  designs  of 


LE   CLERC    AT   PORT-AU-PRINCE.  149 

their  government  against  the  freedom  of  the  negroes  before  the 
chains  of  slavery  should  be  too  firmly  riveted,  he  might  con- 
template a  return  to  the  standard  of  liberty  on  the  part  of  those 
whose  desertion  of  it  had  been  the  effect  of  delusion  rather  than 
of  corruption  ;  and  tbis  anticipation  would  inspire  him  with 
fresh  resolution  to  meet  all  the  sufferings  and  dangers  of  war, 
rather  than  accept  an  insidious  peace  from  the  mortal  enemies 
of  his  country. 

In  the  beginning  of  March,  Le  Clerc  arrived  at  Port-au- 
Prince,  which,  having  been  easily  taken  by  General  Roudet, 
was  found  uninjured  ;  and  fixing  his  head  quarters  there,  he 
proceeded  to  prosecute  the  war  with  fresh  vigour. 

The  first  object  to  which  the  attention  of  the  captain-general 
was  directed  in  the  vicinity  of  his  new  station,  wasCrete-a-Pier- 
rot,  a  post  between  Port-au  Prince  and  St.  Marc,  and  eight 
leagues  from  the  latter  place.  The  fortress,  which  had  been 
regularly  built  by  the  English  during  their  possession  of  this 
part  of  the  island, had  since  been  occupied  by  the  blacks,  who 
had  made  it  one  of  their  d.'|.6ts. 

Almost  the  whole  of  the  French  army  was  employed  in  carry- 
ing on  the  siege  of  this  place,  and  in  occupying  positions  in  the 
neighbourhood  with  a  view  to  prevent  the  retreat  of  the  garri- 
son, which  was  under  the  command  of  Dessalines,  one  of  the 
most  courageous,  enterprising,  and  skilful  of  all  the  negro  gene- 
rals. The  savage  ferocity  displayed  by  the  Fiench  was  such 
as  seldom  stains  the  history  of  modern  warfare.  General  Hardy, 
with  his  troops,  surrounded  six  hundred  blacks,  and  put  them  all 
to  the  sword.  A  part  of  the  same  division  acted  a  similar  tra- 
gedy at  Trianon,  a  post  which  they  carried  with  the  bayonet. 
General  Salines,  with  a  considerable  force,  surrounded  a  small 
negro  camp,  and  every  individual  found  in  it  was  murdered  on 
the  spot.  Rochambeau  spread  devastation  through  the  various 
villages  in  his  march,  murdering  the  inoffensive  inhabitants, 
without  distinction  of  age  or  sex.  Tue  siege  was  commenced 
and  carried  on  with  all  possible  vigour  ;  and  the  defence  was 
conducted  in  a  manner  that  would  not  have  disgraced  the  first 
general  in  Europe.     After  having  removed  almost  every  thing 


150  HISTORY   OF   ST.  DOMINGO. 

that  was  valuable,  and  defeated  all  the  efforts  of  the  assailants 
till  his  ammunition  and  provisions  were  ntarl)'  consumed,  Dessa- 
lines,  with  a  division  of  the  troops,  sallied  forth  in  the  night  and 
departed.  Three  nights  after,  the  remainder  of  the  garrison  Uiade 
a  similar  attempt,  in  which  onl)-  part  of  them  succeeded,  and 
the  rest  were  surrounded  by  the  besiegers,  and  immediately  put 
to  the  sword.  Thus  the  French  obtained  possession  of  a  lor- 
tress,  which  was  a  very  inadequate  compensation  for  the  loss  of 
some  of  their  best  generals  and  many  ol  their  finest  troops 

Intoxicated  with  the  success  he  had  gained,  and  fondly  con- 
cluding that  he  had  nothing  more  to  fear  from  the  black  troops, 
Le  Clerc  imagined  that  the  sooner  he  put  the  plantation  negroes 
again  under  the  drivers  and  the  whips,  the  better  he  .should 
secure  his  conquest,  and  the  more  honour  he  should  obtain  ;  for 
this  was  the  real  design,  and  every  wtiere  but  in  St.  Douiingo, 
had,  from  the  beginning,  been  the  acknowledged  object  ol  all 
his  bloody  labours.  About  the  middle  of  the  m  until  -f  March, 
he  accordingly  published  an  order,  expressly  restoring  to  the 
proprietors  or  their  attornies  all  their  ancient  authority  over  the 
negroes  upon  their  estates. 

This  act  of  consummate  baseness,  almost  equally  surprised  the 
planters  and  the  negroes.  The  planters  thought  it  so  prenia- 
ture  and  imprudent,  that  many  of  them  were  unwilling  to  return 
to  their  estates,  and  thought  it  at  present  altogether  impractica- 
ble to  carry  the  general's  order  into  execution.  The  p<  or  culti- 
vators now  found  their  mistake  in  listening  to  the  French 
general,  who,  within  six  weeks  before,  had  pledged  his  own 
word,  and  that  of  the  first  consul  and  the  French  republic,  for 
the  maintenance  of  their  liberty. 

Tlie  negro  troops,  also,  who  had  united  with  the  invaders, 
could  not  but  be  equally  alaimed  at  this  nefarious  proceeding: 
for  they  had  joined  the  French  standard  in  a  reliance  on  the 
most  positive  assurances  of  freedom,  not  only  to  themselves,  but 
to  all  their  brethren ;  and  the  proi^lamation  for  re-enslaving 
their  brethren  taught  them  to  expect  the  same  fate  whenever  it 
should  appear  to  their  peifidious  friends,  to  be  a  convenient 
time  for  its  infliction.     But  they  dared  not   immediately  to  re- 


PROGRESS    OF    TOUSSAINT.  151 

volt  or  give  any  indications  of  dissatisfaction  ;  for  they  had  been 
prudently  broken  into  small  bodies,  placed  at  a  distance  from 
each  other,  and  mixed  with  the  white  troops  :  by  the  discharge, 
upon  various  pretences,  of  great  nutnbers  from  each  of  their 
corps,  they  had  also  been  much  reduced  in  strength,  and  at  the 
same  time  were  closely  watched  by  the  European  French. 

In  this  imprudent  wickedness  of  his  enemies,  the  indefatiga- 
ble Tousssainl  saw  the  means  of  r-trieving  his  affairs  ;  and  the 
defenceless  state  in  which  th^^  northern  province  had  been  left 
by  the  concentration  of  the  French  force  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Crete-a-Pierrot,  invited  his  first  attention  to  that  quarter. 
Early  in  April,  he  effected  a  junction  with  Chrittophe,  who  had 
still  preserved  about  three  hundred  soldiers ;  and,  instead  of 
continuing  his  fliglit  among  the  njountains,  hastened  towards 
the  north  coast  of  the  island,  where  the  cultivators  were  very 
numerous.  Reaching  Plisance  by  an  unexpected  route,  he  de- 
feated the  troops  under  the  command  of  Desforneaux,  and 
passed  on  without  interruption  through  Dondon  and  Marmelade. 
Wherever  he  came  he  summoned  the  cultivators  to  arms,  and 
they  were  no  longer  deaf  to  his  call,  but  flocked  to  his  standard 
in  multitudes.  Tijey  were  badly  armed,  or  rather,  for  the  'nost 
part,  not  armed  at  all,  except  with  hoes,  and  a  kind  of  cutlass 
which  is  used  in  the  West  Indies  for  trimming  the  green  fences. 
But  their  numbers  and  zeal  enabled  their  leader  to  surmount 
the  gr*eatest  difficulties.  He  poured  his  troops  like  a  torrent, 
over  the  whole  plain  of  the  north,  every  where  seizing  the 
French  posts,  and  driving  their  divisions  befoi'e  him  till  they 
found  refuge  within  the  fortifications  of  Cape  Francois. 

Toussaint  had  no  battering  artillery  ;  yet  he  surrounded  the 
town,  and  would  certainly  have  taken  it,  if  the  French  fleet  had 
not  been  lying  in  the  harbour.  General  Boyer,  the  comman- 
dant, called  to  his  aid  all  the  marines  and  twelve  hundred  sea- 
men from  the  fleet,  but  was  unable  to  oppose  any  successful  re- 
sistance to  the  intrepid  assailants,  by  whom  he  was  quickly 
driven  back  under  the  very  hospital.  New  batteries  were 
raised,  and  the  ships  were  hauled  in  upon  the  shore,  where  their 
broadsides  might  play  upon  the  besiegers.     Yet  after  all,  the 


152  HISTORY  OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

place  must  have  yielded  to  Toussaint  and  his  rustics,  if  General 
Hardy,  with  a  grand  division  of  the  French  army  from  the  south, 
had  not  advanced  by  forced  marches,  and  thrown  himself  into 
the  town.  The  captain-general  was  obhged  to  follow  by  sea, 
quitting  all  his  conquests  in  the  south,  after  having  marched  back 
all  his  detachments  from  the  interior  to  the  coast. 

This  great  alteration  in  the  state  of  the  campaign,  had  all 
been  effected  within  a  fortnight.  At  the  end  of  March,  the 
French  were  at  the  summit  of  their  successes  and  confidence  ; 
and  before  the  middle  of  April  they  were  reduced  to  such  ex- 
tremities, that  Le  Clerc,  besieged  at  the  Cape,  and  scarcely 
able  to  maintain  his  position  there,  had  serious  thoughts  of  eva- 
cuating the  place,  and  retreating  by  sea  to  the  Spanish  part  of 
the  island. 

The  negroes  in  general  were  now  become  as  hostile  to  the 
French  as  they  were  disposed  to  be  friendly  before.  But  the 
chief  struggle  was  at  Cape  Francois,  and  there  the  greatest  in- 
conveniences and  calamities  were. experienced.  The  jissem- 
blage  of  the  multitude  of  people  which  now  crowded  the  place, 
was  soon  followed  by  the  appearance  of  a  dreadful  contagion. 

Till  this  reverse  of  fortune,  the  French  troops  had  been  re- 
markably healthy,  but  now  the  whole  city  was  soon  converted 
into  a  grand  lazaretto  ;  and  great  numbers  who  had  escaped 
the  sword  of  the  blacks,  fell  victims  to  the  devouring  pestilence. 
Powerful  reinforcements  arrived  from  France  ;  but  Toussaint 
still  pressed  the  seige,  and  all  the  efforts  of  the  large  garrison 
were  barely  sufficient  to  defend  themselves  within  their  walls  and 
trenches. 

Le  Clerc  now  felt,  and  deeply  regretted,  his  error.  He  had 
prematurely  dropped  the  mask  of  friendship  to  negro  freedom, 
and  perceived  that  unless  some  new  means  of  delusion  could  be 
devised,  there  wa«  no  hope  of  accomplishing  the  object  of  the 
expedition.  Yet  with  all  the  simplicity  of  the  cultivators,  and 
all  their  aversion  to  the  privations  and  miseries  of  war,  it  seem- 
ed exceedingly  difficult  to  delude  them  again.  It  was  judged, 
however,  not  to  be  impossible,  that  artful  professions  of  a  change 
of  measures,  and  new  declarations  ia  favour  of  liberty,  might 


PROCLAMATION    OF    LE    CLERC.  153 

gain  credit  with  the  blacks,  and  again  divide  the  multitude  from 
their  leaders.  The  captain-general,  therefore,  deterfnined  to 
try  the  experiment,  and,  in  the  event  of  its  success,  to  proceed 
with  more  caution  and  certainty  t§an  before,  in  effecting  the 
purpose  which  he  wished  the  negroes  to  believe  was  sincerely 
and  finally  abjured. 

Witb  these  view?,  combining  the  most  fraudulent  cunning  with 
the  most  abject  meannes?,  he  framed  and  issued  the  following 
proclamation  : — 

"  LlBERTF.  E<^UALITY. 

"  In  the  name  of  the  French  Government, 

"A   PROCLAMATION. 

"  The  General'in- Chief  to  the  Inhabitants  of  St.  Domingo. 

"  Citizens, 

"The  time  is  arrived,  when  order  will  succeed  to  that  chaos 
which  has  been  the  natural  (.-onsequence  of  the  opposition  made 
by  the  rebellious  to  the  landing  of  the  army  in  St.  Domingo. 

*'  The  rapid  operations  and  progress  of  the  army,  and  the  ne- 
cessity of  providing  for  its  subsistence  and  establishment,  have, 
hitherto,  prevented  my  attending  to  the  dt  finitive  organization 
of  the  colony,  i  could  not,  moreover,  have  any  fixed  or  cer- 
tain ideas  of  a  country  with  which  I  was  totally  unacquainted, 
and  consequently  could  not,  without  mature  deliberation,  form 
an  opinion  of  a  people  who  have  been,  for  ten  years,  a  prey  to 
revolutions. 

"  The  basis  of  the  provisionary  organization  which  I  shall 
give  to  the  colony,  but  which  shall  not  be  dkfimitive 
TILL  approved  OF  BY  THE  FkeInch  Governmknt,  IS  Liberty 
and  Equality  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Domingo,  without  re- 
gard to  colour.     This  organization  comprises  :  — 

"  1st.  The  administration  of  justice. 

"2d.  The  interior  administration  of  the  colony,  combined 
with  those  measures  which  its  interior  and  exterior  defence 
require. 

"  3d.  The  imposition  of  duties,  the  means  of  raising  them, 
and  their  application. 

21 


154  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

"  4th.  The  rrgulations  and  ordinances  relative  to  agriculture. 

"  Sth.  The  regulations  and  ordinances  relative  to  commerce. 

"6th.  The  administration  of  the  national  domains,  the 
means  of  making  them  mo.#  beneficial  to  the  state,  so  as  to  be 
less  burtbensome  to  agriculture  and  commerce. 

"  As  it  is  of  infinite  interest  to  you,  citizens,  that  every  insti- 
tution should,  in  an  equal  degree,  protect  agriculture  and  com- 
merce, I  have  not  determined  upun  this  important  work,  with- 
out having  first  had  recourse  to,  and  consulted  with,  the  most 
distinguished  and  enlightened  citizens  of  the  colony. 

•'  1  have  in  consequence,  given  orders  to  the  generals  of  the 
south  and  west  divisions,  to  select  for  each  of  these  depart- 
ments seven  citizens,  proprietors  and  merchants  (without  regard 
to  colow.)  who,  with  eight  more,  which  I  shall  myself  choose 
for  the  department  of  the  north,  are  to  assemble  at  the  Cape  in 
the  course  of  the  present  month,  to  impart  their  observations  to 
me  on  the  plans  which  I  shall  then  submit  to  their  consideration. 

"  It  is  not  a  deliberative  assembly  that  1  establish.  I  am  too 
well  acquainted  with  the  evils  which  meetings  of  this  nature 
have  brought  upon  the  colony,  to  have  that  idea.  The  citizens 
who  are  thus  chosen  being  honest  and  enlightened  men,  to  them 
will  I  communicate  my  views  ;  they  will  make  their  observa- 
tions upon  them,  and  will  be  able  to  impress  on  the  minds  of 
their  fellow-citizens  the  liberal  ideas  with  which  the  government 
is  animated. 

o  "  Let  those  men,  who  are  thus  to  be  called  together,  consider 
this  appointment  as  a  flattering  proof  of  my  consideration  for 
them.  Let  them  consider  that,  for  want  of  their  counsels  and 
advice,  I  might  pursue  measures  disastrous  to  the  colony,  which 
would  ultimately  fall  upon  themselves.  Let  them  consider  this, 
and  they  will  find  no  difficulty  in  leaving,  for  some  time,  their 
private  avocations. 

"  Done  at  the  Head-quarters  of  the  Cape,  5th  Floreal,  year 
10  of  the  French  Republic. 
(Signed) 
"  The  Gnneral-in-Chief,  Le  Clerc. 

A  true  copy, 

(Signed) 
"  The  Deputy  Adjutant-General,  D'Aoust." 


EFFECT  OF  THE  PROCLAMATION.         156 

In  this  paper,  it  may  be  observed,  that  without  expressly  ac- 
knowledging the  injustice  of  his  past  measures,  or  his  Resigns 
against  liberty,  and  even  without  ceasing  to  represent  the  first 
resistance  he  had  received  from  the  armed  negroes  as  rebellious, 
Le  Clerc  artfully  begins  with  an  implied  apology  for  his  late  at- 
tempts, on  the  pretence  of  his  ignoran-^e  of  the  colony,  and  of 
the  character  of  the  people  ;  dexterou-^ly  passing  over  bis  own 
orders  for  the  restoration  of  slavery,  and  treating  what  had  been 
notoriously  done  to  that  end  as  having  arisen  from  the  delay  of 
forming  a  free  government,  for  which  his  wailike  occupations 
bad  not  left  him  sufficient  time  ;  as  if  the  attempts  to  restore  the 
drivers,  and  resume  the  vvhip>,  had  been  natural  and  necessary 
consequences  of  the  want  of  such  positive  regulations  to  the 
contrary,  as  he  had  hitherto  been  too  busy  to  make. 

He  next  proposes  to  give  to  the  colony  a  constitution,  of 
which  liberty  and  equality  to  all  the  inhabitants,  without  distinc- 
tion of  colour,  was  to  be  the  basis.  But  what  was  designed  to 
be  understood  as  an  assurance  of  liberty,  was  rendei^ed  perfect- 
ly nugatory  by  the  construction  of  the  sentence  in  which  it  was 
conveyed.  The  promised  benefit  was  "not  to  be  definitive  till 
approved  of  by  the  French  government ;"  and  the  position  of 
this  clause  exhibited  a  further  specimen  of  the  duplicity  of  its 
author  ;  for  it  admits  of  being  applied,  either  to  ''the  basis  of 
liberty  and  equality,"  or  to  the  crude  scheme  of  "provisionary 
organization,"  which  he  professed  to  found  upon  that  basis. 

The  convocation  of  an  assembly  of  representatives  from  all 
parts  of  the  island,  to  be  appointed  without  distinction  of  colour, 
is  guarded  by  limitations  of  the  powers  of  that,  assembly,  with 
as  much  care  as  if  a  permanent  system  of  representation  were 
sincerely  intended  to  be  established.  The  crafty  Frenchman 
was  well  aware  that  the  negroes  were  not  such  profound  politi- 
cians as  to  concern  themselves  about  those  limitations,  but  that 
they  were  likely  to  be  perfectly  satisfied  at  receiving  an  ac- 
knowledgement of  their  freedom,  accompanied  with  a  proposed 
admission  of  some  of  their  number  to  a  share  in  the  govern- 
ment. 

This  fraudulent  proclamation  was  dated  the  25th  of  April, 


156  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

and  was  instantly  sent  into  the  black  camp,  and  quickly  dispers- 
ed over  every  pari  of  the  island.  It  produced  all  the  immedi- 
ate effect  that  its  author  could  have  wished.  The  negroes  in 
general  were  weary  of  the  war.  Their  exclusion  from  the  chief 
ports,  and  the  reluctance  of  foreigners  to  trade  with  them  un- 
der existing  circumstances,  deprived  them  of  the  comfoits  and 
necessaries  with  which  commerce  used  to  supply  them.  The 
'cultivators  felt  themselves  much  aggrieved  by  the  exposure  to 
hardships  and  dangers,«and  the  separation  from  their  fanjilies, 
caused  by  a  state  of  warfare.  They  saw  no  prospect  of  speedy 
deliverance  from  those  evils  but  by  a  peace.  The  frequent  ar- 
rival of  reinforcements  from  France,  precluded  all  hope  of  be- 
ing able  to  terminate  the  war  by  expelling  the  invaders  from  the 
fortified  towns  on  the  coast.  The  only  object  they  thought  worth 
suffering  and  fig!)ting  for,  was  their  liberty  ;  and  this  they  fond- 
ly flattered  themselves  was  now  secured.  ^ 

These  sentiments  and  feelings  caused  considerable  defection 
in  the  n^gno  army,  and  disposed  some  of  the  chiefs  to  entertain 
proposals  for  a  negociation,  which  was  soon  commenced.  Chris- 
tophe  demanded,  as  the  conditions  of  his  compromise,  a  gener- 
al amnesty  for  his  troops,  the  preservation  of  his  own  rank,  and 
that  of  all  the  other  officers;  and  the  extension  of  the  same 
terms  to  bis  colleague  Dessalines,  and  to  Toussaint,  the  general- 
in-chief.  To  these  terms  the  haughty  Le  Clerc  found  it  diffi- 
cult to  submit;  but  his  impatience  to  obtain  the  praise  of  resto- 
ring the  colony  to  the  mother  country,  overcame  his  reluctance; 
and  the  arrangement  with  Christophe  was  completed.  The  ac- 
cession of  Chrisitophe  was  followed  by  that  of  Paul  Louv^rture, 
the  brother  of  Toussaint,  with  two  thousand  negroes  under  his 
command. 

Negociations  were  next  entered  into  with  Toussaint  and  Des- 
salines, who,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  gave  no  credit  to  the 
French  General  for  the  sincerity  of  his  present  professions,  but 
thought  themselves  obliged,  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they 
were  now  placed,  to  conclude  a  peace  of  experiment,  with  a  sin- 
cere intention  of  fulfilling  both  its  letter  and  spirit,  till  it  should 
be  violated  on  the  part  of  the  French.     They  wished  for  no 


PEACE  CONCLUDED.  157 

Other  terms  than  those  which  had  been  granted  to  Christophe, 
with  a  dignified  retirement  from  all  the  cares  of  pubhc  hfe.  To 
these  wishes,  after  a  few  day's  hesitation,  Le  Clerc  acceded,  and 
by  the  end  of  the  first  week  in  May,  a  peace  was  concluded  with 
Tuussaint,  and  all  the  generals  and  troops  under  his  command, 
and  the  sovereignty  of  France  over  the  island  of  St.  Domingo, 
was  acknowledged  by  all  its  inhabitants. 

The  official  papers,  in  which  the  French  governmFnt  announ- 
ced to  their  own  and  other  nations  the  completion  oflhib  event, 
gave  no  faithful  account  of  the  way  in  which  hostilities  had  been 
terminated.  Toussaint  and  Dessalines  were  represented  as  ma- 
king their  most  humble  submission,  suing  for  pardon  as  guilty 
rebels,  and  obtaining  it  from  the  triumphant  Le  Clerc  with 
great  difficulty.  But  the  captain-general's  proclamation  ctf  the 
25th  of  April,  and  his  own  gazette,  published  at  Cape  Fianqois, 
sufficiently  prove  that  the  submission  and  concessions  had  been 
made  by  him  rather  than  by  them.  The  Cape  gazette,  of  the 
8ih  of  May,  contains  a  letter  from  Le  Clerc  to  Toussaint,  which 
intimates  nothing  of  abject  submission  having  taken  place  on 
the  part  of  the  negro  chief;  and  evinces  a  desire  on  the  part  of 
the  Frenchman,  to  maintain  the  appearance  of  sincere  and  con- 
fidential communication.     It  contained  the  following  passages  ; 

"  You,  General,  and  your  troops,  will  be  employed  and  treat- 
ed like  the  rest  of  my  army.  With  regaid  to  yourself,  you  de- 
sire repose,  and  you  deserve  it.  After  a  rthan  has  sustained  for 
several  years  the  burden  of  the  government  of  St  Domingo,  I 
apprehend  he  needs  repose.  1  leave  you  at  liberty  to  retire  to 
which  of  your  estates  you  please.  I  rely  so  nmch  or  tJje  attach- 
ment you  bear  to  the  colony  of  St.  Domingo,  as  to  believe  that 
you  will  employ  the  moments  of  leisure  which  you  may  have  in 
your  retreat,  in  communicating  to  me  your  sentiments  respect- 
ing the  means  proper  to  be  taken,  to  make  agriculture  and  com- 
DWjrce  again  to  flourish.  As  soon  as  a  list  and  statement  of  the 
troops  under  General  Dessalines  are  transmitted  to  me,  I  will 
communicate  to  you  my  instructions  as  to  the  positions  they  are 
to  take." 

Toussaint  retired  to  a  small   plantation,   called   by  his  own 


158  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

name,  Louverture,  and  situated  at  Gonaives,  on  the  south-west 
coast  of  the  island,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  town  of  St.  Marc. 
There,  in  the  bosom  of  his  remaining  family,  (for  his  two  sons 
who  had  been  under  the  care  of  Coisnon  were  never  heard  of 
after  their  return  to  Cape  Francois  with  their  perfidious  tutor,) 
he  entered  upon  the  enjoyment  o(  that  repose  of  which  he  had 
long  been  deprived.  But  the  French  general  no  sooner  perceiv- 
ed the  negro  chief  In  his  power,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the 
colony  apparently  re-established,  than  he  meditated  one  of  the 
basest  acts  of  treachery  that  ever  disgraced  any  government  in 
any  age. 

About  the  middle  of  May,  in  the  dead  of  night,  the  Creole 
frigate,  supported  by  the  Hero,  a  seventy-four-gun  ship,  both 
dispatched  on  purpose  from  Cape  Fran9ois,  stood  in  towards 
the  Calm  Beach,  near  Gonaives.  Several  boats  with  troops 
immediately  landed,  and  surrounded  the  house  of  Toussaint, 
where  he  was  at  rest  with  the  faithful  companion  of  all  his  cares 
and  dangers,  and  his  family  lay  wrapped  in  sleep,  all  uncon- 
scious of  their  approaching  fate.  Brunei,  a  brigadier-general, 
and  Ferrari,  aid-de-camp  to  Le  Clerc,  entered  the  chamber  of 
the  hero  with  a  file  of  grenadiers,  and  demanded  his  instant 
surrender,  requiring  him  to  go,  with  all  his  family,  on  board  the 
frigate.  The  lion  was  in  the  toils,  and  resistance  was  useless. 
Toussaint  expressed  immediate  submission  to  his  own  fate,  but 
requested  that  his  feeble  wife  and  harmless  children  might  be 
suffered  to  remain  at  home.  This  condition,  however,  was  not 
to  be  granted.  An  irresistible  military  force  appeared,  and 
before  the  neighbourhood  was  generally  alarmed,  the  whole  fam- 
ily, including  the  daughter  of  a  deceased  brother,  were  on  board 
the  frigate  and  under  sail.  Thence  they  were  removed  to  the 
Hero,  which  proceeded  with  them  immediately  to  France. 

To  justify  a  proceeding,  the  cruelty  and  malig;nity  of  which 
has  justly  excited  the  indignation  of  Europe,  Le  Clerc  alledged 
that  Toussaint  had  "  engaged  in  a  conspiracy,  and  was  anxious 
to  regain  his  former  influence  in  the  colony."  But  of  this  crime, 
some  evidence  at  least,  ought  to  have  been  offered  to  the 
public.     Not  a  shadow  of  proof  has  been  furnished  of  the  alleg- 


TOUSSAINT  ARRESTED.  159 

ed  offence,  wbich  rests  wholly  on  the  assertion  of  the  French 
commander;  an  asseition  which  derives  as  little  credibility 
from  known  circumstances,  as  from  the  general  character  of  its 
author.  From  the  peace  with  Toussaint  to  the  hour  of  his 
seizure,  there  was  not  time  enough  to  meditate,  much  less  to 
organize,  a  plan  of  conspiracy  ;  and  the  ships  of  war  must  have 
been  sent  from  Cape  Franqois,  almost  as  soon  as  he  had  arrived 
at  his  home. 

The  French  general  had  been  so  cautious  in  his  measures,  in 
the  contemplation  of  this  outrage,  that  the  negro  troops  and 
officers,  who  were  indignant  at  such  treachery,  could  make  no 
effectual  resistance.  They  had  been  previously  dispersed  through 
the  island,  in  different  garrisons  and  mixed  with  European 
troops,  by  whom  they  were  very  closely  watched.  Two  chiefs 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Gonaives,  flew  to  arms,  and 
attacked  the  banditti  who  were  carrying  off  the  abdicated  gene- 
ral ;  but  their  attempt  to  rescue  him  was  unavailing,  and  cost 
them  their  own  lives.  They  were  taken  by  the  French  ;  and 
Le  Clerc,  in  one  of  his  dispatches,  written  just  after,  says, — "  I 
have  ordered  them  to  be  shot."  In  the  same  letter  he  states, 
that  about  a  hundred  of  the  principal  confidential  friends 
of  Toussaint  had  been  arrested,  and,  without  proof  or  allegation 
of  any  other  crime  than  the  possession  of  his  friendship,  pro- 
ceeds to  say,  that  some  of  them  had  been  sent  on  board  the 
frigate  LaMuiron,  which  was  under  orders  for  the  Mediterra- 
nean, and  that  the  rest  had  been  distributed  among  the  differeiit 
ships  of  the  squadron.  What  became  of  these  unfortunate  men 
is  not  certainly  known.  The  mention  of  the  Mediterranean  in- 
duced a  supposition  at  the  time,  that  the'y  were  sold  as  slaves 
on  the  coast  of  Barbary.  But  from  the  entire  silence  of  the 
French  government  as  to  their  ultimate  disposal,  it  is  highly 
probaljle  that  they  were  thrown  overboard  at  sea  and  drowned  ; 
a  fate  which  is  well  known  to  have  befallen  many  of  their  breth- 
ren not  long  after. 

On  the  voyage  from  St.  Domingo  to  France,  Toussaint  was 
refused  all  intercourse  with  his  family  ;  he  was  confined  constant 
ly  to  his  cabin,  and  the  door  was  guarded  by  soldiers  with 


160  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

fixed  bayonets.  On  the  arrival  of  the  ship  at  Brest  no  time 
was  lost  in  hurrying  him  on  shore.  On  the  deck  only  was  he 
permitted  to  have  an  interview  with  his  wife  and  children,  whom 
he  was  to  meet  no  more  in  this  life.  The  agonizing  separation 
of  this  faithful  pair  and  their  btloved  offspring,  excited  in  all 
who  witnessed  it,  compassion  for  their  fate.  He  was  conveyed 
in  a  close  carriage,  and  under  a  strong  escort  of  cavalry,  to  the 
castle  of  Joux  in  Normandy,  where  he  was  committed  to  the 
strictest  confinement,  with  a  single  negro  attendant,  who  during 
his  continuance  there,  which  was  but  for  a  short  time,  was  as 
closely  confined  as  his  master. 

Toussaint's  wife  and  family  were  detained  at  Brest  for  two 
months,  and  then  were  removed  to  Bayonne.  From  this  lime  they 
disappeared  from  the  land  of  the  living,  but  by  what  means  is 
unknown. 

From  the  castle  of  Joux,  Toussaint,  at  the  approach  of  win- 
ter, was  removed  to  Besancjon,  and  there  immured  in  a  cold, 
damp,  and  gloomy  dungeon,  like  one  of  the  worst  of  criminals. 
This  dungeon  may  be  regarded  as  his  sepulchre.  Let  the  read- 
er imagine  the  horrors  of  such  a  prison,  to  one  who  had  been 
born,  and  lived  near  threescore  years,  in  a  W  est  Indian  climate  ; 
where  warmth  and  air  are  never  wanting,  even  in  jails  ;  and 
where  the  beams  of  the  sun  are  only  too  bright  and  continual. 
It  has  been  confidently  asserted  by  respectable  authority,  that 
the  floor  of  the  dungeon  was  covered  with  water.  In  ihis  de- 
plorable condition,  without  any  comfort,  ot  alleviatit>n  of  his 
sufferings,  he  lingered  through  the  winter,  and  died  in  the  spring 
of  the  following  year.  His  death  was  announced  in  the  French 
papers  of  the  27th  of  April,  1803. 

Thus  terminated  the  career  of  this  truly  great  man,  whose 
sufferings  and  death  left  an  indelible  infamy  on  the  government 
under  whose  merciless  oppression  he  perished. 

The  silence  of  this  history  respecting  his  failings  must  not  be 
considered  as  arising  from  a  supposition  that  he  had  attained 
unerring  perfection.  Faultless  perfection  is  not  an  attribute  of 
mortal  man.  The  universal  experience  of  the  world,  and  the 
dictates  of  inspired  wisdom,  place  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  his 


CHARACTER    OF    TOUSSAINT.  161 

character  had  its  blemishes;  though  the  historian,  having  never 
heard  what  they  were,  has  it  not  in  his  power  to  record  them. 
But  it  is  no  rhetorical  exaggeration,  it  is  only  the  sober  language 
of  historic  truth,  to  say,  that  the  talents  and  virtues  of  Toussaint 
Louverture,  entitle  him  to  the  grateful  recollections  of  his  libe- 
rated countrymen ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  the  unfavourable 
circumstances  of  his  birth  and  situation,  his  character  will  bear 
a  comparison  with  that  of  the  most  virtuous  and  patriotic  lea- 
der or  governor  of  ancient  or  modern  times. 


9Q 


CHAP.  IX. 

FROM  JUNE  1802,  TO  THE  EXPULSION  OF  THE  FRENCH  FORCES 
IN  DECtMBEH  1803. 

Colonial  Regulations  of  Le  Clerc — The  Blacks  again  take  vp  arms. 
— Distressed  state  of  the  French,  from  disease,  and  defection. — 
Their  cruel  attempts  to  exterminate  the  negroes,  hy  massacres,  hy 
drownings,  and  by  blood-hounds  employed  to  hunt  them  down  — Death 
of  General  Le  Clerc. — The  chief  command  devolves  on  General 
Rochambeau. — Further  decline  of  French  affairs. — Several  skir- 
mishes.— Battle  of  Acul. — Five  hundred  prisoners  murdered  by  the 
French. — Retaliation  of  the  Blacks. —  fFar  renewed  between  Great 
Britain  and  France. — /i  British  squadron  appears  on  the  coast. — 
The  French  in  Cape  Francois  blockaded  by  sea  and  land — Their 
extreme  distress,  capitulation,  and  final  evacuation  of  the  islafld. 

1m.mediateu>f  on  the  siVzure  and  removal  of  Toiissaint,  Le 
Clerc  assumed  the  title  ofgenjeral  in-chi^f,  in  addition  to  that  of 
captain-general,  with  which  he  came  from  France.  On  the 
22d  of  June  he  issued  a  decree,  in  which  .he  affected  to  orga- 
nize a  new  system  of  government  for  the  island.  Most  of  the 
regulations,  however,  both  municipal  and  military,  were  the 
same  as  had  been  established  by  the  negro  chief.  Martial  lawr 
was  continued  with  certain  modifications.  The  administration 
of  the  districts  was  committed  to  the  respective  military  com- 
mandants, assisted  by  councils  of  notables,  or  representatives. 
Each  commune  was  to  provide  for  its  own  expenses,  to  be 
fixed  by  the  general-in-chief,  and  levied  on  the  district  by  the 
assembly  of  notables.  These  councils  were  to  hold  an  imme- 
diate correspondence  with  the  sub-prefects,  and  all  other  assem- 
blies of  citizens  were  prohibited. 

The  outrage  on  the  person  and  family  of  Toussaint,  opened 
the  eyes  of  the  negroes  to  the  real  designs  of  the  French  gov- 
ernment. They  found  themselves  to  be  deceived  and  betrayed. 
Dessalines,  Christophe,  and  Clerveaux,  were  justly  alarmed 
with   the  apprehension  of  being  destined  to  share  the  fate  of 


DISTRESSES   OP   THE    FRENCH,  163 

their  deluded  colleague ;  and  were  soon  found  at  the  head  of 
considerable  bodies  of  troops,  ready  to  renew  the  struggle  for 
liberty,  and  determined  to  succeed  or  perish  in  the  attempt. 

Before  these  generals  openly  declared  themselves,  and  while 
they  were  preparing  to  re-commence  hostilities  against  the  ene- 
mies of  their  race,  other  chiefs  arose  in  the  interior  of  the  island, 
and  began  to  make  excursions  from  the  mountains.  Among 
those  from  whom  the  French  experienced  peculiar  annoyance, 
were,  a  negro  of  the  Congo  tribe,  who  commiited  considerable 
depredations,  but  could  never  be  discovered  :  and  another,  a 
nephew  of  Toussaint,  of  the  name  of  Charles  Bellair,  who,  with 
bis  heroic  wife,  spread  slaughter  and  devastation  among  their 
foes;  till  after  a  while  they  were  both  taken,  and  died  under 
the  most  dreadful  tortures. 

Of  the  situHlion  of  the  French  during  the  summer  of  1802, 
some  faint  ideas  may  be  formed  from  the  account  of  this  period* 
given  in  a  dispatch  of  General  Buyer,  some  months  after. — 
"  The  heat  became  excessive ;  it  was  iiripossible  to  make  any 
movement :  the  lowest  mernes  presented  obstacles  to  us,  pro- 
portioned to  the  inconvenience  of  the  ten)perature.  The  bri- 
gands" (the  hostile  negroes)  "  increased  in  numbers.  Our  hos- 
pitals were  crowded  with  sick,  and  disease  daily  made  new  ra^ 
vages.  The  brigands  calculated  its  progress  with  a  secret  joy. 
In  the  south,  partial  insurrections  took  place.  Domage  revolt- 
ed, and  burnt  several  plantations  :  this  wretch  was  arrested, 
tried,  and  put  to  death. — The  nt>rthern  part  is  a  prey  to  the 
most  dreadful  disturbances."  The  captain  general  himself 
found  his  health  considerably  impaired ;  the  most  able  officers 
of  his  staff  had  fallen  ;  and  their  successors,  recently  arrived, 
being  unacquainted  with  the  country,  and  unprepared  for  the 
warfare  to  which  they  were  condemned,  sunk  into  despondency, 
and  furnished  new  victims  for  the  devouring  pe-tilence. 

In  addition  to  the  havock  of  disease,  the  French  army  was 
further  diminished  by  defection.  This  was  not  confined  to  the 
blacks^  or  to  privates  and  subalterns  among  the  whites.  Even 
General  Dugua,  the  chief  of  the  staff,  disgusted  with  the  hor- 
rors of  the  war,  and  shocked  with  the  barbarous  executioa 


164  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

of  Bellair  and  his  wife,  was  making  arrangements  for  quitting 
his  post ;  when  he  was  discovered,  and  took  the  dreadful  reso- 
lution to  elude  the  vengeance  intended  for  him  by  destroying 
himself. 

In  this  season  of  convulsion  and  terror,  the  French  had  re- 
course to  barbarities,  worse  than  had  ever  before  stained  the 
annals  of  any  people  pretending  to  the  character  of  civilization. 
Knowing  the  preference  of  death  to  slavery  to  be  the  general 
sentiment  of  the  negro  population,  and  having  determined  on 
the  utmost  exertions  to  leave  this  beautiful  island  a  desolate 
wilderness,  rather  than  the  happy  abode  of  a  nation  of  free 
blacks,  the  Fiench  general  lost  no  time  in  endeavouring  to  ex- 
teraiinate  all  who  resisted,  or  were  suspected  of  intending  to  re- 
sist, t-he  designs  of  their  oppressors. 

From  their  first  landing  in  the  island,  the  invaders  had  given 
no  quarter  in  the  field.  This  was  admitted  by  the  consular 
gazettes ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  Cape  Francois  witnessed  the 
daily  execution  of  all  the  negro  soldiers  who  were  brought 
prisoners  into  that  town.  Now,  however,  not  only  the  prisoners 
taken  in  arms,  but  almost  all  the  male  negroes  and  mulattoes, 
of  whom  the  French  could  obtain  possession  were  coolly, 
murdered,  and  often  with  circumstances  of  shocking  barbarity. 

Near  Cape  Francois,  a  pit  was  dug,  about  thirty  feet  deep, 
on  the  margin  of  which  the  victims  were  made  to  kneel ;  and 
being  shot  in  that  position,  they  fell  down  to  the  bottom.  If 
only  wounded,  they  were  left  to  endure  the  tortures  of  a  lingering 
death,  among  thr  dead  and  putrifying  carcasses  of  their  prede- 
cessors. At  least  five  hundred  are  said  to  have  perished  in  this 
way,  among  whom  were  Bellair  and  his  wife. 

But  drowning  was  deemed  a  mure  convenient  mode  of  dis- 
patching the  objects  of  this  murderous  proscription.  Great 
numbers  were  huriied  on  board  the  various  ships  in  the  different 
harbours.  Some  were  crowded  into  the  holds  and  suffocated, 
and  then  thrown  into  the  sea  :  others  were  chained,  and  forced 
overboard  alive.  Among  the  objects  of  this  barbaiity,  were  the 
soldiers  of  a  black  regiment  stationed  at  Cape  Fran(;ois,  who, 
in  defending  the  place  had  acted  with  perfect  fidelity  to  their-- 


BLOODHOUNDS.  165 

» 

European  masters ;  but  about  half  the  corps  stationed  at  an 
outpost,  receiving  information  that  they  were  suspected  and 
doomed  to  destruction  the  next  day,  went  off  to  the  enemy.  As 
soon  as  this  was  known,  the  division  in  the  town  were  seized, 
sent  on  board  frigates,  and  drowned.  This  was  the  fate  of 
thousand?.  Some  of  these  atrocities  were  committed  so  near 
the  land,  that  multitudes  of  the  corpses  were  driven  in  by  the 
tide,  and  cast  upon  the  shore. 

Many  parties  were  surrounded  and  massacred  by  hundreds 
at  a  time.  Such  massacres  were  daily  perpetrated,  especially 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cape  Frangnis,  so  that  the  air  became 
tainted  by  the  putrefaction  of  the  bodies  :  and  the  invading 
troops  being  driven  from  the  field,  and  obliged  to  fortify  them- 
selves in  the  principal  towns,  confined  space,  and  additional 
numbers  increased  the  conta«;ion,  and  all  the  French  stations 
presented  scenes  of  complicated  and  exlrenie  distress. 

The  ferocity  of  the  invaders  seems  to  have  been  increasingly 
sharpened  by  every  successive  discomfiture  and  disappointment. 
To  complete  the  cliinax  of  more  than  savage  cruelty,  they  re- 
sorted to  the  use  of  bloodhounds,  which  they  obtained  chiefly 
from  the  island  of  Cuba.  These  dogs  were  trained  with  great 
care,  and  much  perverse  ingenuity,  to  inspire  them  with  an  at- 
tachment to  all  persons  of  white  complexion,  and  wiih  an  insa- 
tiable thirst  for  the  blood  of  the  blacks;  whom  they  were  after- 
wards employed  in  hunting  down  with  unrelenting  fury,  like  so 
many  wild  beasts  of  the  forest. 

On  more  than  one  occasion,  some  of  the  prisoners,  whom 
their  merciless  oppressors  were  pleased  to  denounce  as  crimi- 
nals, were  thrown  alive  to  the  bloodhounds.  Of  this  unparal- 
leled enormity  the  authors  made  no  secret,  at  the  tcene  of  its 
jierpetration,  giving  public  notice  of  the  time  and  place  at 
which  the  horrid  spectacle  would  be  exhibited.  The  ordinary 
day  for  such  exhibitions  was  Sunday.  A  large  ring  was  lined 
with  the  military  under  arms  ;  the  ferocious  dogs  were  in  the 
centre,  and  the  human  victims  were  delivered  naked  to  their 
rage.  The  reader's  feelings  shall  not  be  tortured  with  a  des- 
cription of  what  followed,  which  made  the  white  inhabitants  of 


166  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO* 

Cape  Francois,  who  attended  as  spectators,  to  repent  of  their 
ill-judged  curiosity. 

Nor  were  the  ravages  of  these  brute  auxiliaries  limited  to  the 
particular  missions  assigned  them  by  their  employers.  Being 
but  slendeily  fed,  in  order  to  sharpen  their  voracity  for  the  re- 
quired service,  they  would  frequently  break  loose  and  devour 
infants  from  the  public  way.  At  other  times  they  would  hasten 
to  the  neighbouring  woods,  and  sui  prizing  a  fau)ily  of  harmless 
cultivators  at  their  homely  repast,  or  during  their  nighlly  re- 
pose, would  involve  them  all  in  one  common  destruction.  But 
even  for  these  horrors,  though  not  specifically  designed,  the  re- 
sponsibility must  be  charged  on  those  who  trained  and  employ- 
ed the  animals  for  so  abominable  a  purpose.  'J'he  whole  con- 
duct of  the  principal  agents  of  the  French  government  through- 
out this  expedition,  betrayed  an  entire  destitution  of  every  prin- 
ciple of  justice,  and  every  sentiment  of  humanity. 

But  all  the  efforts  of  their  barbarous  policy  were  insufficient 
to  ensure  success,  and  only  served  to  inflame  the  ardour  of  the 
blacks.  By  the  middle  of  October,  the  French  had  lost  Fort 
Dauphin,  Port  Paix,  and  several  other  posts  of  considerable 
importance,  and  the  pestilence  continued  to  rage  with  unremit- 
ting fury.  Towards  the  end  of  that  month,  the  General-in- 
chief,  who  had  tried  every  means  in  his  power  for  the  restora- 
tion of  his  impaired  health,  suddenly  became  worse,  and  on  the 
night  of  the  first  of  November  he  died.  The  body  was  im-ne- 
diately  opened  for  medical  examination,  then  embalmed,  and^ 
conveyed  on  board  the  Swiftsure  man-of-war.  Madame  Le 
Clerc  followed  the  corpse  of  her  deceased  husband,  Admiral 
Latouche,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  fleet  undertaking  to 
esc(»rt  her  home,  accompanied  by  the  first  aid-de  camp  of  the 
departed  general,  whose  hat  and  sabre  were  placed  with  great 
formality,  upon  the  bier  on  board,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  of- 
ficers who  were  able  to  attend  on  the  occasion. 

By  the  death  of  Le  Clerc,  the  chief  command  devolved  on 
General  Rochambeau,  who  was  then  at  Port-au-Prince,  but  has- 
tened without  delay  to  Cape  Francois.  His  arrival  effected  lit- 
tle alteration  in  the  state  of  affairs.     Great  expeclaliyns,  indeed^ 


ROCHAMBEAU   SUCCEEDS  LE  CLERC.  167 

were  entertained,  from  his  knowledge  of  the  island,  and  his  for- 
mer experience  of  the  character  of  the  blacks ;  but  it  is  doubt- 
ful whether  he  possessed  talents  capable  of  employing  this 
knowledge  and  experience  to  advantage;  and  still  more  doubt- 
ful, whether  any  talents  could  have  been  successful  in  the  situa- 
tion in  which  he  was  placed.  The  French  artny  was  daily  more 
and  more  weakened  and  dispirited ;  and  that  of  the  blacks  was 
every  day  gaining  fresh  strength,  and  advancing  in  military  ar- 
dour, and  confidence  of  ultimate  success. 

Several  actions  of  little  importance  were  fought  between  the 
detachjnents  of  the  different  armies.  The  most  considerable 
one  took  place  on  the  plains  of  St.  Nicholas  Mole,  where  the 
French  appear  to  have  maintained  their  ground  better  than  on 
most  other  occasions  at  this  period  of  the  war.  The  battle  con- 
tinued during  the  night,  when  the  combatants  precipitated  each 
other  into  the  sea.  But  all  the  advantages  gained  by  the  French, 
the  renewed  attacks  of  their  enemies  obliged  them  soon  to  re- 
linquish. Tliey  were  rathei  more  successful  at  Fort  Dauphin, 
which,  after  it  had  for  some  time  withstood  a  powerful  attack, 
both  by  sea  and  land,  surrendered  to  General  Clauzel. 

By  the  end  of  the  year,  not  less  than  forty  thousand  French- 
men are  believed  to  have  fallen  ;  and,  though  troops  continued 
to  be  sent  from  Havre  and  Cherbourg,  each  division  was  less  ef- 
fective than  the  preceding;  and  the- reinforcements  at  length 
consisted  of  none  but  raw  conscripts  from  the  countries  which 
had  been  overrun  by  the  republican  armies. 

The  commencement  of  the  year  130.?  was  not  distinguished 
by  any  active  operatiims  in  the  field.  The  French  were  sitting 
down  within  their  fortifications,  in  a  state  of  exhaustion,  waiting 
foi  the  arrival  of  further  reinforcements.  The  blacks  were  dai- 
ly increasing  in  nuinbeis,  and  preparing'to  renew  hostilities  with 
augmented  vigor ;  in  hope  of  bringing  the  contest  to  a  speedy 
termination.  With  this  view,  Dessalines,  who  had  been  unani- 
mously appointed  their  general-in-chief,  collected  a  considera- 
ble force  upon,  the  plain  of  the  Cape  ;  which  induced  Rocham- 
beau  to  withdraw  the  French  troops  from  every  other  point,  for 
the  defence  of  the  capital. 


168  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

Thus  both  armies  became  prepared  for  a  battle,  which  both 
generals  endeavoured  for  some  time  to  avoid  : — but  several  skir- 
mishes having  taken  place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Acul,  Ro- 
chambeau  at  length  resolved  to  hazard  an  action.  When  it  was 
on  the  point  of  commencing,  a  body  of  troops  who  were  march- 
ing to  strengthen  one  of  the  wings  of  the  French  army,  were 
surrounded  by  the  blacks  and  taken  prisoners.  Rocharabeau 
began  the  attack  with  impetuosity^  and  the  blacks  for  some  time 
retreated  before  him  ;  but  they  afterwards  became  assailants  in 
their  turn,  repulsed  him  with  considerable  loss,  and  at  night  re- 
mained masters  of  the  field. 

In  the  course  of  the  day,  the  French  had  taken  about  five 
hundred  prisoners,  and,  equally  at  variance  with  justice  and 
sound  policy,  devoted  them  to  that  end  to  which  they  regretted 
that  the  fortune  of  war  did  not  enable  them  to  devote  all  their 
brethren.  Without  the  least  consideration  of  his  own  men  who 
were  prisoners  in  ihe  negro  camp,  the  French  general  ordered 
these  unhappy  captives  to  be  immediately  put  to  death.  Many 
of  the  victims  of  this  infamous  cruelty,  however,  were  not  de- 
prived of  life  at  once  ;  but  were  left  in  a  state  of  mutilation  too 
dreadful  to  describe.  The  shrieks  and  groans  extorted  by  their 
agonies  interrupted  the  stillness  of  the  night ;  and,  being  heard 
«t  a  considerable  distance,  excited  universal  horror.  Dessalines 
was  immediately  informed  of  this  atrocious  conduct,  and  deter- 
mined on  signal  retaliation  : — he  ordered  the  instant  erection 
ol"  five  hundred  gibbets,  selected  all  the  French  officers  who 
had  been  taken  prisoners,  and  adding  privates  to  make  up  the 
number,  caused  them  to  be  all  hung  up  by  the  break  of  day,  in 
the  sight  of  the  French  army.  The  blacks  then  advanced  upon 
the  French  with  the  most  vigorous  impetuosity,  and  in  the  finest 
order,  raised  their  camp,  threw  their  whole  line  into  confusion, 
and  pursued  them  to  the  gates  of  Cape  Francois. 

In  the  month  of  April,  the  last  reinforcement  arrived  from 
EJurope.  In  May,  war  was  renewed  between  Great  Britain  and 
IVance  ;  and  in  July,  an  English  squadron  appeared  on  the 
coast  of  St.  Domingo.  By  this  time,  the  French  were  entirely 
confined  to  the  city  of  Cape  Francois,  and  a  district  not  exceed- 


BLOCKADE  OF  CAPE  FRAN9OIS.         16^ 

ing  two  miles  round  it.  The  place  was  closely  blockaded  by 
Dessalines  ;  who,  on  the  arrival  of  the  English,  sent  off  a  flag 
of  truce,  invitino;  the  commander  to  act  in  concert  against  their 
common  enemies,  and  soliciting  supplies  of  military  stores. 
The  British  commander  considered  himself  not  authorized  to 
enter  into  any  formal  treaty  upon  this  application  of  the  blacks; 
but  hesitated  not  to  maintain  a  friendly  correspondence  with 
them,  and,  in  the  event,  rendered  essential  service  to  their  cause 
by  blockading  the  harbour  of  Cape  Francois.  One  of  the  fri- 
gates stationed  at  the  eastern  end  of  that  harbour,  soon  captur- 
ed a  number  of  vessels  that  were  attempting  to  convey  provi- 
sions from  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island.  Thus  the  French 
were  prevented  from  receiving  any  reinforcements  or  supplies 
by  sea.  The  spirit  and  courage  of  the  blacks  increased  with 
the  difficulties  which  their  foes  had  to  encounter ;  and  they 
were  too  vigilant  to  permit  the  introduction  of  any  succours  by 
land. 

The  French  general  continued  to  maintain  his  station  with  a 
pertinacity  worthy  of  a  better  cause  ;  but  the  miseries  sustained 
by  the  besieged  were  such  as  the  annals  of  war  have  seldom 
recorded,  and  were  fast  approaching  the  extremity  of  human 
endurance.  Rochambeau  afterwards  described  himself  and  his 
comrades  at  this  period  as  "  pressed  almost  to  death  by  abso- 
lute famine,  and  wretchedly  appeasing  the  desperate  calls  of 
hunger  by  feeding  on  their  horses,  mules,  asses,  and  even  dogs." 
Dogs  were  of  course  the  last  of  those  animals  which  the  neces- 
sities of  starvation  would  compel  them  to  accept — but  this  at 
length  was  the  shocking  fact;  and  it  is  one  of  those  remarkable 
events  which  sometimes  almost  disclose  to  mortal  view  the  in- 
visible hand  of  a  righteous  Providence,  that  the  French  were 
actually  obliged,  for  several  weeks,  to  subsist  on  those  very  blood- 
hounds which  they  had  procured  for  the  purpose  of  hunting 
down  the  negroes. 

About  the  middle  of  November,  the  besieging  army  forced 
some  of  the  out-works,  and  were  making  preparations  for  taking 
the  city  by  storm.     The  inflexibility  of  the  French  commander 

was  now  constrained  to  give  way.     Knowing  that  the  storm,  if 

23 


170  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

attempted,  would  certainly  succeed,  and  dreading  the  conse- 
quences of  falling  into  the  hands  of  an  enraged  enemy,  ivhose 
sword  he  could  not  reasonably  expect  that  any  who  bore  arms 
would  in  such  an  event  be  permitted  to  escape, — Rochambeau 
offered  articles  of  capitulation,  which  Despalines  thought  pro- 
per to  accept.  These  articles  were  signed  on  the  19th  of  No- 
vember, and  stipulated  that  the  French  were  to  evacuate  Cape 
Fran(;ois  and  its  dependent  forts,  at  the  end  of  ten  days,  with 
all  the  ordnance,  ammurjition,  and  stores,  in  their  existing  con- 
dition ;  retiring  in  their  own  slilps,  v.ilh  the  honours  of  war  and 
all  their  private  property  ;  and  leaving  their  sick  and  wounded  in 
the  hospitals,  to  be  taken  care  of  by  the  blacks  till  their  recove- 
ry, and  then  to  be  embarked  for  France  in  neutral  vessels. 
These  were  certainly  terms  which  the  conduct  of  the  French 
towards  the  negroes,  through  the  whole  of  the  invasion,  had  not 
been  such  as  to  entitle  them  to  expect,  and  which  impartial 
justice  must  pronounce  to  have  been  far  more  favourable  than 
they  deserved. 

On  the  same  day  which  witnessed  this  convention  with  Des- 
salines,  the  French  general,  with  a  duplicity  that  would  ha/e 
disgraced  the  meanest  subaltern,  sent  two  officers  with  proposals 
to  treat  for  the  evacuation  of  Cape  Francois,  with  the  com- 
mander of  the  British  squadron.  The  terms  proposed  were  re- 
jected, and  other  terms  offered;  which  Rochambeau,  in  his  turn, 
declared  to  be  inadmissible.  He  flattered  himself,  perhaps, 
with  the  hope,  that  the  stormy  weather  which  the  squadron  was 
then  experiencing  would  afford  an  opportunity  for  his  escape. 
But  the  intelligence  of  the  capitulation,  communicated  by  Des- 
salines,  stimulated  the  English  to  increased  vigilance,  during 
the  few  more  days  which  they  now  had  to  continue  the 
blockade. 

The  duplicity  and  prevarication  of  the  French  general  near- 
ly pioved  fatal  to  himself  and  the  remnant  of  his  force.  He  ap- 
pears to  have  retired  at  last  rather  in  a  way  of  tardy  and  reluc- 
tant flight,  than  in  the  open  and  honourable  fulfilment  of  the 
terms  of  capitulation. 

The  erection  of  the  standard  of  the  blacks  on  the  walls  of 


DEPARTURE  OF  THE  FRENCH.         171 

Cape  Francois  was  not  to  be  procrastinated.  On  the  30th  of 
Novetiiber,  their  colours  were  displayed  at  the  different  forts  j 
and  the  English  commodore,  seeing  no  appearance  of  the  depar- 
ture of  the  French  from  the  harbour,  dispatched  one  of  his 
captains  to  inquire  respecting  the  disposal  of  Rochambeauand 
his  troops.  On  entering  the  harbour,  this  officer  met  one  of 
the  French  captains,  who  entreated  him  to  go  on  board  the 
Surveillante,  and  enter  into  some  capitulation  which  would  put 
the  French  under  the  protection  of  the  English,  and  prevent 
the  blacks  from  sinking  then)  with  red-hot  shot,  as  they  had 
threatened,  and  were  pieparing  to  do.  What  was  the  immedi- 
ate or  avowed  cause  of  this  threat,  is  not  certain  : — but  the  re- 
quest of  the  French  was  liberally  complied  with  by  the  English; 
and,  a  few  articles  being  instantly  drawn  up  and  signed,  infor- 
mation Vvas  immediately  transmitted  to  General  Dessalines,  that 
all  the  ships  and  vessels  in  the  port  had  surrendered  to  the  Bri- 
tish arms,  and  he  was  requested  to  desist  from  firing  till  the 
wind,  which  was  then  blowing  directly  and  strongly  into  the 
harbour,  should  be  fair  for  carrying  them  out.  A  promise  of 
the  solicited  forbearance  was  with  some  difficulty  obtained. 
Embracing  the  first  instant  of  a  favourable  breeze,  the  ships, 
consisting  of  three  frigates  and  seventeen  smaller  vessels,  sail- 
ed out,  according  to  agreement,  under  French  colours,  fired 
their  broadi>ides,  and  then  hauled  down  their  colours,  and 
surrendered.  The  prisoners  of  war  amounted  to  about  eight 
thousand. 

A  small  French  force  still  retained  possession  of  the  Mole, 
under  the  command  of  General  Noailles,  who  was  summoned 
by  the  British  commodore  to  capitulate  ;  but  he  refused,  assert- 
ing that  he  had  supplies  for  five  months.  In  the  course  of  the 
following  night,  however,  December  the  second,  he  evacuated 
the  place,  embarking  his  troops  in  six  vessels.  A  brig,  with  the 
general  on  board,  was  the  only  one  that  escaped  : — the  other 
five  vessels  were  captured  by  the  English  ;  and,  with  those  sur- 
rendered by  Rochambeau,  were  conveyed  to  Jamaica. 

Thus  ended  an  expedition,  the  commencement  of  which  had 
excited  universal  interest  in  France,  stimulating  the  ardour  of 


172  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

the  armv,  attracting  the  cupidity  of  the  merchants,  amusing  the 
ranity  of  the  people,  and  flattering  the  arabition  of  the  govern- 
ment;— the  progress  of  which  had  exhibited  horrors  and  atro- 
cities more  nefarious  and  shocking  than  any  which  had  afflicted 
France  during  the  worst  periods  of  her  revolution  ; — and  the 
discomfiture  and  ultimate  failure  of  which,  furnishing  an  awful 
example  of  the  fatal  consequences  and  condign  punishment  of 
perfidy  and  oppression,  must  be  contemplated  with  cordial  sat- 
isfaction by  every  friend  to  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  the  hu- 
man race. 


CHAP.  X. 

FROM     DECEMBER,    1S03,    TO    THE     SIEGE    OF    THE    CITY   OF    ST. 
DOMINGO,    AT    MIDSUMMER,    1804. 

Preparations  for  the  new  order  of  things  on  the  departure  of  the 
French. — Prorlajnations. — Revival  of  the  name  of  H  atti. — Deisa- 
hnes  appointed  governor  for  life. — Measures  to  increa.se  the  army, 
and  the  maie  population.  ~  Inflammatory  Proclamations  cf  Dessa- 
lines  against  the  French. —  General  massacre  of  them. — Attempt  to 
conquer  the  Spanish  part  of  the  islccnd. 

The  time  between  the  cessation  of  hostilities  and  the  depar- 
ture of  the  French,  had  been  employed  by  the  blacks  in  prepa- 
ring for  the  new  order  of  things  which  was  about  to  con»mence. 
The  first  act  of  the  general-in-chief  bad  been  to  issue  a  procla- 
mation, addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  Cape  FiauQois,  "  to 
tranquillize  the  fears  by  which  they  might  be  alarmed,'"  in  ex- 
pectation of  the  approaching  change.  He  stated  "that  the  war 
which  had  been  waged,  had  no  relation  whatever  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  colony,  and  that  he  had  uniformly  held  out  protec- 
tion and  security  to  the  inhabitants  of  every  complexion."  He 
declared  "  that  on  the  present  occasion  he  would  adhere  to  the 
same  line  of  conduct;"  observing,  "that  the  manner  in  which 
the  inhabitants  of  every  description,  of  Jeremic,  of  Caves,  and 
of  Port-au-Prince,  had  been  treated,  afforded  a  certain  pledge 
of  his  good  faith  and  honour."  He  invited  "those  who  were 
averse  to  leave  their  country,  to  remain,"  assuring  them  "that 
they  should  enjoy  protection  and  security  under  his  govern- 
ment ;"  and  concluded  with  saying,  "that  all  who  were  disposed 
to  follow  the  French  army,  were  free  to  do  so."^ 

The  day  before  the  evacuation  took  place,  another  proclama- 
tion was  published,  signed  by  Dessalines,  Christophe,  and  Cler- 
veaux ; 


174  HISTORY   OF    ST.   DOMINGO. 

"  In  the  name  of  black  people  and  men  of  colour  ;— 

"  The  independence  of  St.  Domingo  is  proclaimed.  Re- 
stored to  our  primitive  dignity,  we  have  asserted  our  rights ; 
we  swear  never  to  yield  them  to  any  power  on  earth.  The 
frightful  veil  of  prejudice  is  torn  to  pieces :  be  it  so  for  ever. 
Woe  be  to  them  who  would  dare  put  together  its  bloody  tatters. 

"Oh!  Landholders  of  St.  Domingo,  wandering  in  foreign 
countries  !  by  proclaiming  our  independence,  we  do  not  forbid 
you,  indiscriminately,  from  returning  to  your  property  ;  far  be 
from  us  this  unjust  idea.  We  are  not  ignorant  that  among  you 
there  are  some  that  have  renounced  their  former  errors,  abjured 
the  injustice  of  their  exorbitant  pretensions,  and  acknowledged 
the  lawfulness  of  the  cause  for  which  we  have  been  spilling  our 
blood  these  twelve  years.  Toward  those  men  who  do  us  justice, 
we  will  act  as  brothers  :  let  them  rely  for  ever  on  our  esteem 
and  friendship  ;  let  them  return  among  us.  The  God  who  pro- 
tects us,  the  God  of  freemen,  bids  us  to  stretch  out  towards 
them  our  conquering  arms.  But  as  for  those  who,  intoxica- 
ted with  foolish  pride,  interested  slaves  of  a  guilty  pretension, 
are  blinded  so  much  as  to  believe  themselves  the  essence  of 
human  nature,  and  assert  that  they  are  destined  by  heaven  to 
be  our  masters  and  our  tyrants,  let  them  never  com»  near  the 
land  of  St.  Domingo  :  if  they  come  hither,  they  will  only  meet 
with  chains  or  deportation.  Then  let  them  stay  where  they  are : 
and,  tormented  by  their  well-deserved  misery,  and  the  frowns 
of  the  just  men  whom  they  have  too  long  mocked,  let  them 
still  continue  to  move,  unpitied  and  unnoticed  by  all. 

"  V\e  have  sworn  not  to  listen  with  clemency  towards  all  those 
who  would  dare  to  speak  to  us  ol  slavery  :  we  shall  be  inexora- 
ble, perhaps  even  cruel,  towards  all  troops  who,  themselves  for- 
getting the  object  for  which  they  have  not  ceased  fighting  since 
1780,  should  come  from  Europe  to  bring  among  us  death  and 
servitude.  Nothing  is  too  dear,  and  all  means  are  lawful,  to 
men. from  whom  it  is  wished  to  tear  the  first  of  all  blessings. 
Were  they  to  cause  rivers  and  torrents  of  blood  to  run;  were  they, 
in  order  to  maintain  their  liberty,  to  conflagrate  sev^n-eights  of 


hi 
M 


ABILITY    OF   NEGROES.  175 

the  globe,  they  are  innocent  before  the  tribunal  of  Providence, 
that  never  created  men,  to  see  them  groaning  under  so  harsh 
and  shameful  a  servitude. 

"  If,  in  the  various  commotions  that  have  taken  place,  some 
inhabitants  against  whom  we  had  not  to  complain,  have  been 
victims  of  the  cruelty  of  a  few  soldiers  or  cultivators,  too  much 
blinded  by  the  remenbrance  of  their  past  sufferings  to  be  able 
to  distinguish  the  good  and  humane  land-owners  from  those 
that  were  unfeeling  and  cruel,  we  lament,  with  all  feeling  souls, 
so  deplorable  an  end.  and  declare  to  the  world,  whatever  may  be 
said  to  the  contrary  by  wicked  people,  that  the  murders  were 
coramited  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  our  hearts.  It  was  impossi- 
ble, especially  in  the  crisis  in  which  the  colony  was,  to  be  able 
to  prevent  or  stop  those  horrors.  They  who  are  in  the  least 
acquainted  with  history,  know  that  a  people,  when  assailed  by 
civil  dissensions,  though  they  may  be  the  most  polished  on  earth, 
give  themselves  up  to  every  species  of  excess,  and  the  authority 
of  the  chiefs,  at  that  time  not  firmly  supported,  in  a  time  of  revo- 
lution cannot  punish  all  that  are  guilty,  without  continually 
meeting  with  new  difficulties*  But  now-a-days,  the  Aurora  of 
peace  hails  us,  with  the  glimpse  of  a  less  storniy  time  ;  now  that 
the  calm  of  victory  has  succeeded  to  the  troubles  of  a  dreadful 
war,  every  thing  in  St.  Domingo  ought  to  assume  anew  face, 
and  its  government  henceforward  be  that  of  justice. 

"  Done  at  the  Head  Quarters,  Fort  Dauphin,  Novembier  29, 
1803. 

(Signed)  '  "Dessalines. 

"Chhistophe. 

"  Clerveaux." 

The  ability  displayed  in  this  and  other  publications,  and  the 
military  skill  and  prowess  which  had  vanquished  the  veteran 
legions  of  France,  headed  hy  commanders  accustomed  to  victo- 
ry, furnished  many  practical  and  not  unseasonable  proofs  of  the 
despicable  futility  of  those  reasonings  which  would  degrade  the 
negro  below  the  level  of  our  species,  and  make  him  merely  an 
intermediate  link  in  the  chain  of  being,  connecting  the  human 


176  .      HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

with  the  brute.  The  style  of  the  proclamation  was  evidently 
borrowed  from  the  French  revolutionary  school ;  but  the  de- 
gree of  moderation  exhibited  in  it,  formed  a  striking  contrast 
to  the  violent  language  and  sanguinary  conduct  of  the  expelled 
invaders. 

The  liberated  blacks  now  determined  on  discarding  the  ap- 
pellations which  the  island  had  received  from  Kuropeans,  and 
reviving  the  name  of  Hay n,  by  which  it  was  designated  by  the 
aboriginal  inhabitants  when  first  visited  by  Columbus. 

On  the  first  day  of  the  year  1S04,  the  generals  and  chiefs  of 
the  army,  in  the  name  of  the  people  of  Hayti,  signed  a  iormal 
declaration  of  independence,  and  tookasolemn  oath  to  lenounce 
France  for  ever,  pledging  themselves  to  each  other,  to  their 
posterity,  and  to  the  universe,  to  die  rather  than  submit  again  to 
her  dominion.  At  the  same,  time  they  appointed  Jean  Jacques 
Dessalines,  governor-general  for  life,  with  power  to  enact  laws, 
to  make  peace  and  war,  and  to  nominate  his  successor. 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  his  government,  was  to  encourage  the 
return  of  negroes  and  mulattoes  from  the  United  States  of 
America.  In  the  early  commotions,  many  wealthy  planters 
had  quitted  the  island  and  gone  to  the  continent,  taking  with 
them  a  number  of  their  slaves,  whom  the  want  of  funds  to 
support  their  former  establishment  had  afterwards  obliged  them 
to  abandon  :  others  had  voluntarily  emigrated  thither  at  differ- 
ent periods  :  and  many  of  both  classes  were  now  in  circumstan- 
ces of  distress,  without  the  means  of  returning  to  their  country. 
Dessalines  published  a  proclamation,  offering  to  the  captains  of 
American  vessels  the  sum  offorty  dollars  for  each  individual  na- 
tive black  or  man  of  colour,  whom  they  should  convey  back  to 
Hayti.  The  general  character  of  Dessalines  will  hardly  permit 
this  measure  to  be  considered  as  the  result  of  pure  humanit}'. 
It  seems  lo  have  originated  in  a  wish  to  recruit  his  army,  and  to 
restore  his  exhausted  male  population. 

The  same  motive  dictated  another  measure  of  a  very  differ- 
ent character.  In  treating  with  a  British  agent  from  Jamaica, 
Dessalines,  among  other  commercial  advantages,  offered  to 
open  his  ports  to  the  slave  ships,  and  to  allow  the  people  of  Ja- 


OFFER   TO    PURCHASE    NEGROES.  177 

aiaica,  the  exclusive  privilege  of  selling  negroes  in  Hayti.  But 
this  was  to  be  for  the  importation  of  men  only,  and  those  not 
for  slavery,  but  for  tnililary  service.  To  an  American  gentle- 
man, who  had  more  than  one  conversation  with  him  on  the  sub- 
ject, and  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  the  plan  as  liable  to  be 
construed  into  an  encouragemeut  of  the  slave  trade,  Dessalines 
defended  it  by  observing,  that  so  many  men  would  be  brought 
from  Africa,  whether  he  adopted  the  measure  or  not,  and  that 
instead  of  doing  them  any  harm,  his  plan  would  secure  them 
from  a  dreadful  slavery  in  the  English  islands,  to  make  thern 
freemen  and  soldiers.  The  doctrine  of  political  expediency 
has  seldom,  perhaps,  been  urged  with  more  plausibility,  though 
it  certainly  fails  of  a  satisfactory  vindication  of  the  plan. 

Though,  on  the  evacuation  of  Cape  Fran(joi3,  the  French  in- 
habitants had  leave  and  opportunity  to  depart  with  their  armed 
countrymen,  the  insecurity  of  any  attempt  to  remove  their  mo- 
ney and  other  moveable  effects,  determined  almost  all  of  them 
to  remain  behind.  Seeing  the  British  squadron  cruising  off  the 
harbour,  and  knowing  that  whatever  property  they  should  era- 
bark  would  be  captured  and  condemned  as  prize,  they  thought 
it  better  to  stay,  trusting  to  the  faith  and  mercy  of  Dessalines, 
than  to  depart  without  the  means  of  subsistence.  Former  ex- 
perience of  the  mildness  and  humanity  of  the  blacks,  inspired  a 
hope  of  forgiveness  and  good  treatment,  notwithstanding  the  re- 
membrance of  recent  circumstances,  which  might  seem  to  pre- 
clude all  expectation  of  mercy  from  that  insulted  and  injured 
people. 

The  astonishing  forbearance  of  Toussaint,  and  of  all  who  had 
served  under  him,  encouraged  a  persuasion  that  their  humanity 
was  not  to  be  wearied  out  by  any  provocation.  All  the  white  in- 
habitants who  had  been  carried  off  as  hostages,  by  Christophe, 
on  his  retreat  from  Cape  Fran9ois,  had  returned  in  safety,  when 
the  peace  was  made  with  Le  Clerc  :  and  it  was  known  that, 
during  the  whole  time  of  their  absence,  they  had  been  well 
treated  by  Toussaint  and  his  followers  ;  though  the  French,  du- 
ring that  period,  were  refusing  quarter  to  the  negroes  in  the 

field,  and  murdering  in  cold  blood  all  whom  they  took  prison- 

24 


178  HISTORY   OF   ST.  DOMINGO. 

ers.  Though  Toussaint  was  now  no  more,  there  is  reason  to 
believe  that  the  hopes  of  the  white  inhabitants  of  Cape  Fran- 
cois, and  other  places,  wouM,  nevertheless,  have  been  realized, 
if  the  humane  feelings  of  the  negroes  in  general  had  been  se- 
conded by  the  sentiments  of  his  successor,  or  if  that  successor 
had  been  any  one  but  Dessalines. 

Whatever  were  the  secret  intentions  of  this  sanguinary  chief, 
when  be  was  promising  protection  and  security  to  these  unfor- 
tunate people,  but  few  weeks  elapsed  before  he  evidently  con- 
templated their  destruction.  Just  after  his  appointment  to  the 
office  of  governor  for  life,  he  published  a  most  inflanjmatory 
proclamation,  stating  the  enormous  crimes  of  the  French,  and 
urging  his  countrymen  to  vengeance. 

"  It  is  not  enough,"  says  he,  "■  to  have  driven  from  our  country 
the  barbarians  who,  for  ages,  have  stained  it  with  blood  :  it  is 
not  enough  to  have  repressed  the  successive  factions  which,  by 
turns,  sported  with  a  phantom  of  liberty  which  France  placed 
before  their  eyes.  It  is  become  necessary  to  ensure,  by  a  last 
act  of  national  authority,  the  permanent  empire  of  liberty  in  the 
country  which  has  given  us  birth.  It  is  necessary  to  deprive  an 
inhuman  government,  which  has  hitherto  held  our  minds  in  a 
state  of  most  humiliating  torpor,  of  every  hope  of  enslaving  us 
again. — Those  generals,  who  have  conducted  your  struggles 
against  tyranny,  have  not  yet  done.  The  French  name  still 
darkens  our  plains  :  every  thing  reminds  us  of  the  ctuelties  of 
that  barbarous  people.  Our  laws,  our  customs,  our  towns,  every 
thing  bears  the  impression  of  France. — What  do  I  say.''  There 
still  remain  Frenchmen  in  our  island.  Victims  for  fourteen 
years  of  our  own  credulity  and  forbearance!  conquered  not  by 
French  armies,  but  by  the  artful  eloquence  of  the  proclamations 
of  their  agents!  When  shall  we  be  tired  of  breathing  the  same 
air  with  them .''  W^bat  have  we  in  common  with  that  bloody- 
minded  people  .''  Their  cruelties  compared  to  our  moderation — 
their  colour  to  ours — the  extension  of  seas  which  separate  us— 
our  avenging  climate — all  plainly  tell  us  they  are  not  our  breth- 
ren ;  that  tbey  never  will  become  so  ;  and,  if  they  find  an  asy- 
lum among  us,  they  will  still  be  the  instigators  of  troubles  and 


PROCLAMATION    OP    DESSALINES.  179 

divisions.  Citizens,  ri)en,  women,  young  and  old,  cast  round  your 
eyes  on  every  part  ofthis  island;  seek  there  your  wives,  your  hus- 
bands, yourbrothers,  your  sisters— what  did  I  say?  seek  your  chil- 
dren— your  children  at  the  breast,  what  is  become  of  them? 
Instead  of  those  interesting  victims,  the  affrighted  eye  sees  only 
their  assassins — tigers  still  covered  with  their  blood,  and  whose 
frightful  presence  upbraids  you  with  your  insensibility,  and 
your  slowness  to  avenge  them.  Why  do  you  delay  to  appease 
their  manes  ?  Do  you  hope  that  your  remains  can  rest  in  peace 
by  the  side  of  your  fathers,  unless  you  shall  have  made  tyranny 
to  disappear.''  Will  you  descend  into  their  tombs,  without  hav- 
ing avenged  them  ?  Their  bones  would  repulse  yours.  And 
ye,  invaluable  men,  intrepid  generals,  who,  insensible  to  private 
sufferings,  have  given  new  life  to  liberty,  by  lavishing  your 
blood;  know,  that  you  have  done  nothing  unless  you  give  to 
the  nations  a  terrible,  though  just  example,  of  the  vengeance 
tbal  ought  lo  be  exercised  b\  a  brave  people  who  have  recover- 
ed thtir  liberty  and  are  determined  to  maintain  it.  Let  us 
intimidate  those  who  would  dare  to  attempt  depriving  us  of  it 
again  :  let  us  begin  with  the  French  ;  let  them  shudder  at  ap- 
proaching our  shores,  if  not  on  account  of  the  cruellies  they 
have  committed,  at  least  at  the  tenible  resolution  we  are  about 
to  make — Vo  devote  to  death  whatever  native  of  France  dares 
to  soil  with  his  sacrilegious  footstep  this  land  of  liberty. 

"  Slaves — leave  to  the  French  nation  this  odious  epithet ;  they 
have  conquered  to  be  no  longer  free — let  us  walk  in  other  foot- 
steps ;  let  us  imitate  other  nations,  who  carrying  their  solicitude 
into  futurity,  and  dreading  to  leave  posterity  an  example  of 
cowardice,  have  preferred  to  be  exterminated,  rather  than  to 
be  erased  from  the  list  of  free  nations.  Let  us,  at  the  same 
time,  take  care,  lest  a  spirit  of  proselytism  should  destroy  the 
work  ; — let  our  neighbours  live  in  peace.  Pt  ace  with  our 
neighbours,  but  accursed  be  the  French  name — eternal  hatred 
to  France :  such  are  our  principles. — Swear  then  to  live  free 
and  independent,  and  to  prefer  death  to  every  thing  that  would 
lead  to  replace  you  under  the  yoke  ;  swear  to  pursue  for  ever 
the  traitors,  and  enemies  of  your  independence." 


180  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

In  the  month  of  February,  the  governor-general  issued  ano- 
ther  proclamation,  less  intemperate,  and  which  nothing  but  his 
breach  of  the  pronlised  auinesiy  rendered  objectionable.  It  en- 
joined judicial  proceedings  against  the  actors  and  accomplices 
in  the  inhuman  massacres  coi)lly  perpetrated  under  the  govern- 
ment of  Le  Clerc  and  Rochambeau  ;  in  which  he  asserted  that 
more  than  sixty  thousand  of  his  brethren  had  been  drowned, 
suffocated,  hanged,  shot,  and  otherwise  put  to  death.  "  This 
measure,"  he  says,  ''is  adopted  in  order  to  inform  the  nations 
of  the  world,  that  although  we  grant  an  asylum  and  protection 
to  those  who  act  with  candour  and  friendship  towards  us, 
nothing  shall  evei  avert  our  vengeance  from  those  murderers  who 
have  delighted  to  bathe  themselves  in  the  blood  of  the  innocent 
children  of  Ha}ti." 

So  strongly  were  the  people,  and  the  army  in  general,  dis- 
posed to  moderation  and  clemency,  that  all  his  instigations, 
sufficient  as  they  seem,  in  connection  with  the  remembrance 
of  recent  outrages,  to  have  excited  a  popular  massacre  in 
any  country  upon  earth,  wholly  failed  ol  pioducing  that  effect. 
Having  for  some  lime  laboured  in  vain  to  make  the  people  at 
laige  the  instruments  of  his  sanguinary  purpose,  he  at  length 
determined  to  accomplish  it  by  a  military  execution.  The  va- 
rious towns  where  any  French  inhabitants  remained,  were  suc- 
cessively visited  by  him,  and  those  unhappy  people,  with  certain 
exceptions,  were  put  to  the  sword,  under  his  personal  orders 
and  inspection,  by  the  troops  whom  he  appointed  to  this  hor- 
rible service. 

The  work  of  blood  was  perpetrated  most  systematically,  in 
exact  obedience  to  the  cruel  mandate  of  the  chief.  Precau- 
tions were  adopted  to  prevent  any  other  foreigners  from  being 
involved  in  the  fate  of  the  Freucb.  In  Cape  Francois,  where 
the  tragfdy  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  20lb  of  April  j 
lest,  from  mistake  or  some  other  cause,  any  of  the  American 
merchants  should  be  molested,  a  strong  guard  was  sent  in  the 
evening  to  each  of  their  houses,  with  oiders  not  to  suffer  any  in- 
dividual to  enter,  not  even  one  of  the  black  generals,  without 
the  consent  of  the  master  ;  who  was  apprized  of  these  orders 


CRUELTY   OF   DESSALINES.  181 

that  he  might  be  under  no  apprehensions  for  his  own  safety. 
These  orders  were  so  punctually  obeyed,  that  one  of  those  pri- 
vileged individuals,  who  had  given  shelter  to  some  Frenchmen, 
was  able  to  protect  them  to  the  last. 

The  French  priests,  and  surgeons,  and  others,  who  during  the 
war  had  manifested  humanity  to  the  negroes,  were  spared,  to 
the  amount  of  about  one  tenth  part  of  the  whole  number.  The 
massacre,  in  other  respects,  was  indiscriminate.  Neither  age 
nor  sex  was  regarded.  The  personal  security  enjoyed  by  the 
Americans,  did  not  prevent  them  from  feeling  it  a  night  of  hor- 
rors. At  short  intervals  they  heard  the  pick-axe  thundering  at 
the  door  of  some  devoted  neighbour,  and  soon  forcing  it. 
Piercing  shrieks  aln)ost  immediately  ensued,  and  these  were  fol- 
lowed by  an  expressive  silence.  The  next  minute  the  militarj' 
party  were  heard  proceeding  to  some  other  house,  to  renew 
their  work  of  death. 

There  was  one  act  in  this  tragedy,  which  stamps  the  conduct 
of  Dessalines  with  thft  c.haraciei  of  most  flagitious  perfidy,  as 
well  as  cruelty.  A  proclamation  was  published  in  the  newspa- 
per, slating,  that  the  vengeance  due  to  the  crimes  of  the  French 
had  been  sufliciently  executed,  and  inviting  all  who  had  escaped 
the  massacre  to  appear  on  the  parade,  and  receive  tickets  of  pro- 
tection, after  which,  it  was  declared,  they  might  depend  on 
perfect  security.  As  the  massacre  had  been  expected,  many 
hundreds  had  contrived  to  secrete  themselves  ;  most  of  whom 
now  came  forth  from  their  hiding  places,  and  appeared  on  the 
parade.  But  instead  of  receiving  the  promised  tickets  of  pro- 
tection, they  were  instantly  led  away  to  the  place  of  execution 
and  shot.  The  rivulet  which  runs  through  the  town  of  Cape 
Francois  was  literally  red  with  their  blood. 

The  vindictive  measures  of  the  chief  were  far  from  being 
generally  applauded,  even  by  his  brethren  in  arms.  The  disap- 
probation of  Christophe  was  well  known,  though  a  regard  to 
his  own  safety  restrained  him  from  any  open  opposition.  Tele- 
maque,  and  another  officer,  expressed  their  horror  at  such 
scenes;  and  were  punished  by  being  compelled  to  hang,  with 
their  own  hands,  two  Frenchmen  then  in  the  fort.    The  milita- 


* 


182  HISTORY    OP    ST.   DOMING©. 

ry  execution,  with  all  its  enormity,  must  be  imputed  to  Dessa- 
lines  alone.  In  the  following;  address  "  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Hayti,"  with  the  publication  of  which  he  conclu'led  the  month 
of  April,  he  ostentatiously  claimed  the  procedure  as  his  own, 
gloried  in  hisj  superiority  to  the  vulgar  feelings  which  would  have 
opposed  such  severity,  and  evidently  laboured  to  reconcile  his 
followers  to  his  sanguinary  conduct  by  insisting  upon  its  justice 
and  necessity  ;  at  the  same  time  affecting  to  contrast  his  system 
with  that  of  the  mild  and  humane  Toussaint,  charging  him  with 
a  want  of  firmness  at  least,  if  not  of  faithfulness,  and  warning  his 
own  successors  against  following  the  same  conciliatory  plan. 

"  Crimes  the  most  atrocious,  such  as  were  hitherto  unheard 
of,  and  would  cause  nature  to  shudder,  have  been  perpetrated. 
The  measure  of  their  cruelty  overflowed.  At  length  the  hour 
of  vengeance  has  arrived,  and  the  implacable  enemies  of  the 
rights  of  man  have  suffered  the  punishment  due  to  their  crimes. 

"  My  arm,  raised  over  their  heads,  has  too  long  delayed  to 
strike.  At  that  signal,  which  the  justice  of  God  has  urged, 
your  hands,  righteously  armed,  have  brought  the  axe  to  bear 
upon  the  ancient  tree  of  slavery  and  prejudice.  In  vain  had 
time,  and  more  especially  the  infernal  politics  of  Europeans, 
surrounded  it  with  triple  brass.  You  have  stripped  it  of  its 
armour ;  and  have  placed  it  upon  your  heart,  that  you  may  be- 
come (like  your  natural  enemies.)  cruel  and  merciless.  Like  a 
mighty  and  overflowing  torrent,  that  bears  down  all  opposition, 
your  vengeful  fury  has  swept  away  every  obstacle  to  its  impe- 
tuous course.  Perish  thus!  all  tyrants  over  innocence,  all  op- 
pressors of  mankind  ! 

*•  What  then  ?  Bent  for  many  ages  under  an  iron  yoke,  the 
eport  of  the  passions  or  injustice  of  men,  and  of  the  caprices  of 
fortune;  mutilated  victims  of  the  cupidity  of  white  Frenchmen; 
after  having  fattened  by  our  toils,  these  insatiate  blood-suckers, 
with  a  patience  and  resignation  unexampled,  we  should  again 
have  seen  that  sacrilegious  horde  attempt  our  destruction,  with- 
out any  distinction  of  sex  or  age  ;  and  we,  whom  they  call  men 
without  energy,  of  no  virtue,  of  no  delicate  sensibility,  should 
not  we  have  plunged  in  their  breast  the  dagger  of  desperation  ? 


PROCLAMATION    OF    DESSALINES.  18& 

f 

Where  is  that  Haytian  so  vile,  so  unworthy  of  his  regeneration, 
who  tliinks  he  has  not  fulfilled  the  decrees  of  the  Eternal,  by 
exterminating  these  blood-thirsty  tygers  ?  If  there  is  one,  let 
him  fly;  indignant  nature  discards  him  from  our  bosom;  let 
him  hide  his  infamy  far  hence  ;  the  air  we  breathe  is  not  suit- 
ed to  his  gross  organs  ;  it  is  the  air  of  liberty,  pure,  august,  and 
triumphant. 

"  Yes,  we  have  rendered  to  these  real  cannibals,  war  for  war, 
crime  for  crime,  outrage  for  outrage.  Yes,  1  have  saved  my 
country  ;  1  have  avenged  America.  The  avowal  I  make  in  the 
face  of  earth  and  heaven,  constitutes  my  pride  and  my  glory. 
Of  what  consequence  to  me  is  the  opinion  which  contemporary 
and  future  generations  will  pronounce  upon  my  conduct?  I  have 
performed  my  duty  ;  I  enjoy  my  own  approbation  :  forme  that 
is  sufficient. 

"  But  what  am  I  saying  ?  The  preservation  of  my  unfortu- 
nate brethren,  and  the  testimony  of  my  own  conscience,  are 
not  n)y  only  recompense  :  I  have  seen  two  classes  of  men,  born 
to  cherish,  assist,  and  succour  one  another— mixed  in  a  world, 
and  blended  together — crying  for  vengeance,  and  disputing  the 
honi)ur  of  the  first  blow.  Blacks  and  Yellows,  whom  the  refin- 
ed duplicity  of  the  Europeans  long  endeavoured  to  divide  ;  you 
who  are  consolidated,  and  make  but  one  family  ;  without  doubt 
it  was  necessary  that  your  perfect  reconciliation  should  be  seal- 
ed with  the  blood  of  your  butchers.  Similar  calamities  have 
hung  over  your  proscribed  heads  ;  a  similar  ardour  to  strike  your 
enemies  has  signalized  you  :  the  like  fate  is  reserved  for  you,, 
and  the  like  interests  must  therefore  render  you  for  ever  one, 
indivisible,  and  inseparable.  Maitjtain  that  precious  concord, 
that  happy  union  amongst  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  pledge  of  your 
happiness,  your  salvation,  and  your  success  ;  it  is  the  secret  of 
being  invincible. 

"  It  is  necessary,  in  order  to  strengthen  these  ties,  to  recal  to 
your  remembrance  the  catalogue  of  atrocities  committed  against 
our  species  ;  the  intended  massacre  of  the  entire  population  of 
this  island,  meditated  in  the  silence  and  sang-froid  of  the  cabi- 
net :  The  execution  of  that  abominable  project  to  roe  was  un- 


184  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

blu shingly  proposed,  when  already  begun  by  the  French,  with 
the  calmness  and  serenity  of  a  countenance  accustomed  to  simi- 
lar crimes.  Guadaloupe  pillaged  and  destroyed  ;  its  ruins  still 
reeking  with  the  blood  of  the  children,  women,  and  old  men, 
put  to  the  sword ;  Pelage,  (himself  the  victim  of  their  crafti- 
ness)  after  having  basely  betrayed  his  country  and  his  brethren; 
the  brave  and  immortal  Delgresse,  blown  into  the  air  with  the 
fort  he  defended,  rather  than  accept  their  offered  chains.  Mag- 
nanimous warrior !  that  noble  death,  far  from  enfeebling  our 
courage,  serves  only  to  rouse  within  us  the  determination  of 
avenging  or  of  following  thee.  Shall  I  again  recal  to  your 
memory  the  plots  lately  framed  at  Jeremie  ?  the  terrible  explo- 
sion that  was  to  be  the  result,  notwithstanding  the  generous 
pardon  granted  to  these  incorrigible  beings  at  the  expulsion  of 
the  French  army  .''  the  deplorable  fate  of  our  departed  brethren 
in  Europe  .'*  and  (dread  harbinger  of  death)  the  frightful  despo- 
tism exercised  at  Martinique  ^  Unfortunate  people  of  Marti- 
nique, could  1  but  fly  to  your  assistance,  and  break  your  fetters  ! 
Alas  !  an  insurmountable  barrier  separates  us  ;  yet,  perhaps  a 
spark  from  the  same  fire  which  enflames  us,  will  alight  on  your 
bosoms  :  perhaps,  at  the  sound  of  this  commotion,  suddenly 
awakened  from  your  lethargy,  with  arms  in  your  hands,  you  will 
reclaim  your  sacred  and  indelible  rights. 

"  After  the  terrible  example  I  have  just  given,  that  sooner  or 
later  Divine  justice  will  unchain  on  earth  some  mighty  minds, 
above  the  weakness  of  the  vulgar,  for  the  destruction  and  ter- 
tor  of  the  wicked  ;  tremble  !  tyrants,  usurpers,  scourges  of  the 
new  world  !  Our  daggers  are  sharpened,  your  punishment  is 
ready  !  Sixty  thousand  men,  equipped,  inured  to  war,  obedient 
to  my  orders,  burn  to  offer  a  new  sacrifice  to  the  manes  of  their 
assassinated  brethren.  Let  that  nation  come,  who  may  be  mad 
or  daring  enough  to  attack  me.  Already,  at  its  approach,  the 
irritated  Genius  of  Hayti,  arising  from  the  bosom  of  the  ocean, 
appears  ;  his  menacing  aspect  throws  the  waves  into  commo- 
tion, excites  tempests,  and  with  his  mighty  hand  disperses  fleets, 
or  dashes  tbem  in  pieces  ;  to  his  fonjiidable  voice  the  laws  of 
nature  pay  obedience ;  disease,  plague,  famine,  conflagration. 


PROCLAMATION   OP   DESSALINES.  185 

poison,  are  his  constant  attendants.  But  why  calculate  on  the 
assistance  of  the  climate  and  of  the  elements  ?  Have  I  forgotten 
that  I  command  a  people  of  no  common  cast,  brought  up  in 
adversity,  whose  haughty  daring  frowns  at  obstacles,  and  increas- 
es by  dangers?  Let  them  come,  these  homicidal  cohorts!  I 
wait  for  them  with  firmness,  and  with  a  steady  eye.  I  abandon 
to  them  freely  the  shore,  and  the  places  v^'here  cities  have  ex- 
isted, but  woe  to  those  who  may  approach  too  near  the  moun- 
tains! It  were  better  for  them  to  be  received  by  the  sea  into 
its  profound  abyss,  than  to  be  devoured  by  the  anger  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Hayti. 

"  War,  even  to  death,  to  tyrants  !"  this  is  my  motto  ;  "  Lib- 
erty!  Indep»nd*^nce  !"  this  is  our  rallying  cry. 

"  Generals,  officers,  soldiers,  somewhat  unlike  him  who  has 
preceded  me,  the  Kx-general  Toussaint  L'Ouverture,  I  have 
been  faithful  to  the  promise  I  made  to  you,  when  I  took  up  arms 
against  tyranny,  and  whilst  a  spark  of  life  remains  in  me  1  will 
keep  my  oath.  '  N^ver  again  shall  a  colonist,  or  European,  set 
his  foot  upon  this  territory  with  the  title  of  master,  or  proprie- 
tor.' This  resolution  shall  henceforward  form  the  fundamental 
basis  of  our  constitution. 

"  Should  other  chiefs,  after  me,  by  pursuing  a  conduct  dia- 
metiically  opposite  to  mine,  dig  their  own  graves,  and  those  of 
their  own  species,  you  will  have  to  accuse  only  the  law  of  destiny, 
which  shall  have  taken  me  away  from  the  happiness  and  welfare 
of  my  fellow  citizens.  May  my  successors  follow  the  path  I 
shall  have  traced  for  them  !  It  is  the  system  best  adapted  for 
consolidating  their  power;  it  is  the  highest  homage  they  can 
render  to  my  memory. 

"  As  it  is  derogatory  to  my  character,  and  my  dignity,  to  pun- 
ish the  innocent  for  the  crimes  of  the  guilty,  a  handful  of  whites, 
commendable  by  the  religion  they  have  always  professed,  and 
who  have  besides  taken  the  oath  to  live  with  us  in  the  woods, 
have  experienced  my  clemency.  I  order  that  the  sword  respect 
them,  and  that  they  may  be  unmolested. 

"  I  recommend  anew,  and  order  all  the  generals  of  depart- 
ments, ^c.  to  grant  succours,  encouragement  and  protection,  to 

25 


186  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

all  neutral  and  friendly  nations,  who  may  wish  to  establish  com- 
mercial relations  in  this  island." 

The  most  important  charge  exhil)ited  in  this  document, 
against  the  Frt-nch  iniiabitants  remaining  in  the  island  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  invading  army,  is  the  allusion  to  plots  in  which, 
notwithstanding  the  mercy  lecently  shewn  them,  they  are  de- 
clared to  have  been  engaged.  Of  the  reality  of  such  plots,  the 
proclamation  maybe  deemed  very  questionable  evidence;  but 
that  they  were  at  kast  credibly  imputed,  and  generally  believed 
by  the  people,  may  be  reasonably  presumed  from  this  appeal  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  public.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  incredible 
in  the  fact  itseif,  to  those  who  remember  the  situation  of  affairs, 
and  the  character  of  the  supposed  conspirators.  The  French 
fi  igatcs  and  troops  which  had  taken  shelter  in  Cuba,  were  cut- 
ting (jff  supplies  from  without,  and  apparently  menacing  the  ne- 
groes with  a  new  invasion  from  a  coast  within  sight  of  their  own. 
And  after  their  behaviour  to  the  generous  Toussaint,  by  whom 
they  had  been  brought  back  from  exile,  protected,  and  restored 
to  their  estates,  there  is  no  favourable  presumption  due  to  the 
planters  of  this  island,  against  a  charge  of  perfidy  and  ingrati- 
tude. 

All  this,  however,  if  strictly  true,  and  that  to  the  most  con- 
siderable extent,  could  neither  justify  nor  extenuate  an  extra- 
judicial military  execution,  and  especially  the  slaughter  of  un- 
offending children. 

To  an  American  with  whom  Dessalines  repeatedly  conversed 
on  the  subject  of  the  massacre,  after  its  perpetration,  he  chiefly 
Ui^ed  to  urge  the  necessity  of  satisfying  his  troops  by  the  death 
of  those  who  had  murdered  their  fathers,  children,  and  friends  ; 
for  that  the  French  in  general  were  chargeable  with  the  guilt 
of  those  enormities:  that  as  an  encouragement  to  his  troops  in 
the  siege  of  Cape  Francois,  be  had  promised  them  the  plunder 
of  the  town,  and  the  destruction  of  the  monsters  within  it ;  and 
that  they  had  become  discontented  in  consequence  of  his  not 
having  sooner  fulfilled  that  engagement.  It  seems  not  to  have 
entered  into  his  thoughts  that  any  degree  of  validity  which  this 


ADDRESS    TO    THE    SPANIARDS.  187 

defence  might  otherwise  possess,  must  have  been  wholly  de- 
stroyed by  his  subsequent  promises  to  the  inhabitants  at  the  time 
of  the  capitulation  :  but  there  is  little  room  to  wonder  at  a 
breach  of  compact  in  this  ferocious  and  illiterate  negro,  after  the 
examples  given  to  him  by  Le  Clerc,  Rochambeau,  and  the 
government  of  France.  He  appeared  to  value  himself  on  re- 
taliating upon  the  French  their  own  maxims  and  conduct,  in 
entire  contrast  to  wliat  he  deemed  a  blameable  weaknes?  in  his 
predecessor,  Toussaint. 

A  small  detachment  of  French  troops  still  retained  possession 
of  the  city  of  St.  Domingo  :  and  the  Spanish  inliahitants  of  the 
eastern  part  of  the  island,  who,  on  the  evacuation  of  Cape  Fran- 
qns,  had  acknowledged  the  new  government,  had  since,  under 
the  influence  of  their  priests,  withdrawn  their  promised  obe- 
dience, and  espoused  the  cause  of  the  French.  The  first  objects 
which  engaged  the  attention  of  Dessalines,  after  the  massacre 
in  the  month  of  April,  were  the  subjugation  of  the  Spaniards, 
and  the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  the  last  of  their  strong 
holds.  He  determined  also  on  proceeding  all  round  the  coast, 
to  examine  every  station,  and  enforce,  where  it  should  be  neces- 
sary, all  the  regulations  he  had  established. 

A  few  days  before  the  commencement  of  his  journey,  he  issu- 
ed a  proclamation,  addressed  "to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Spanish 
part  of  the  island,"  upbraiding  them  with  their  treachery,  and 
calling  upon  them  to  return  to  their  violated  allegiance;  announ- 
cing his  approach  at  the  head  of  his  victorious  legions ;  invit- 
ing their  submission  by  assurances  of  his  protection  and  favour, 
and  threatening  to  punish  their  hostility  with  the  most  tremen- 
dous vengeance.  "  A  few  moments  more,  and  [  shall  crush  the 
remnant  of  the  French  under  the  weight  of  my  mighty  power. 
Spaniards  !  you  to  whom  1  address  myself  solely  because  I  wi'^Ii 
to  save  you  ;  you  who  for  having  been  guilty  of  evasion  shall 
soon  preserve  your  existence  only  so  far  as  my  clemency  may 
deign  to  spare  you  ; — it  is  yet  time  ;  abjure  an  error  which  may 
be  fatal  to  you.  and  break  off  all  connexion  with  my  enemy,  if 
you  wish  that  your  blood  may  not  be  confounded  with  his,  I 
give  you  fifteen  days,  from  the  dale  of  this  notification,  to  for- 


188  HISTORt    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

ward  your  last  intentions,  and  to  rally  under  my  banners.  You 
know  what  I  can  do,  and  what  I  have  done  :  think  of  your  pre- 
servation. Receive  the  sacred  promise  which  1  make,  to  do 
nothing  against  your  personal  safety  or  interest,  if  you  seize 
upon  this  occasion  to  shew  yourselves  worthy  of  being  admitted 
among  the  children  of  Hayti." 

On  the  14th  of  May,  Dessalines  set  out  from  Cape  Francois, 
by  the  way  of  the  Mole,  Port  Paix,  and  Gonaives,  employing 
himself  at  the  different  places  in  repairing  the  injuries  of  war, 
and  settling  every  thing  that  required  his  interference  and  au- 
thority. After  going  through  the  western  and  southern  provin- 
ces, he  proceeded  on  his  march  to  the  Spanish  part  of  the 
island,  with  a  confidence  of  success  which  no  circumstances 
warranted  his  entertaining.  His  recent  cruelty,  notwithstanding 
the  attempt  in  his  proclamation  to  prevent  its  being  turned  to 
his  prejudice  with  these  Spaniards,  could  not  but  have  inspired 
them  with  horror ;  and  they  were  not,  like  Europeans,  inferior 
from  the  influence  of  the  climate.  They  were  cljirflv  descen- 
dants of  negroes,  or  a  mixture  of  the  African  race,  and  their 
numbers,  according  to  the  best  accounts,  at  the  time  of  Tous- 
saint's  conquest  of  their  country,  were  above  a  hundred  thousand 
free  persons,  and  about  fifteen  thousand  slaves.  The  species  of 
slavery  there  was  so  mild  that  the  subjects  of  it  were  generally 
and  strongly  attached  to  their  masters ;  and  both  masters  and 
slaves  inherited  a  national  prejudice  against  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  other  part  of  the  island. 

Dessalines  laid  siege  to  the  city,  of  St.  Domingo,  which  ap- 
pears to  have  made  a  more  vigorous  resistance  than  he  antici- 
pated. He  would  probably  have  persevered  in  the  attempt,  but 
the  arrival  of  a  French  squadron  with  a  reinforcement  of  troops, 
leaving  him  little  hope  of  a  speedy  conquest,  he  raised  the 
siege,  and  marched  back  again  without  having  accomplished 
either  of  the  objects  of  his  expedition. 


CHAP.  XI. 

FROM     MIDSUMMER    1804,    TO     THE     DEATH     OF    DESSALINBS   IN 
OCTOBER,    1305. 

Dessalines  takes  the  title  of  emperor. — His  coronation. — "Neic  constitu- 
tion framed. — Outline  of  it. — Remarks. — State  of  the  cultivators. — 
Productions. — Population  and  military  force. — Plan  of  defence. — 
Religion. — Education. — Character  and  anecdotes  of  Dessalines. — 
His  tyranny  and  death. 

The  return  of  Dessalines,  from  his  expedition  to  the  Spanish 
part  of  the  island,  was  soon  followed  by  his  exchange  of  the  title 
of  governor  for  that  of  emperor;  and  on  the  8th  of  October 
he  was  crowned  with  great  pomp,  according  to  a  schedule  of 
cere:nonies  previously  fixed  by  those  who  were  denominated 
the  constituted  authorities  of  the  country.*  The  imperial  dig- 
nity, and  its  investment  in  the  person  of  Dessalines,  were  further 
recognized  and  confirmed  by  a  new  constitution  for  the  island, 
which  was  promulgated  on  the  8th  of  May,  in  the  following 
year. 

This  constitution  purported  to  have  been  framed  by  twenty- 
three  men,  whose  names  were  prefixed,  and  who  professed  to 
have  been  legally  appointed  the  representatives  of  the  people. 
"  In  the  presence  of  the  Supreme  being,  before  whom  all  man- 
kind are  equal,  and  who  has  distributed  so  many  species  of 
creatures  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  for  the  purpose  of  mani- 
festing his  glory  and  his  power  by  the  diversity  of  his  work ;"  and 
in  the  presence  of  all  nations  by  whom  they  had  been  so  unjust- 
ly and  so  long  considered  as  outcast  children  ;  they  declared  the 
Gonslitution  to  be  the  free  expression  of  their  hearts,  and  the 
general  will  of  their  constituents. 

"  For  tke  particulars  of  this  Ceremouial,  see  Appendix  III, 


190  HISTORY    OF    ST   DOMINGO. 

The  preliminary  declaration  decreed  the  erection  of  the  em- 
pire of  Hayti  into  a  free,  sovereign,  and  independent  state  ;  the 
'abolition  of  slavery  for  ever;  the  equality  of  ranks;  the  equal 
operation  of  laws;  the  inviolability  of  property;  the  loss  of 
citizenship  by  emigration,  and  the  suspension  of  it  by  bank- 
ruptcy ;  the  exclusion  of  all  white  men,  of  whatever  nation, 
from  acquiring  property  of  any  kind,  excepting  only  such  whites 
as  had  been  naturalized,  and  their  children,  together  with  the 
Germans  and  Polanders,  who  had  been  naturalized  ;  and  the 
adoption  of  the  generic  name  of  Blacks  for  all  the  subjects  of 
Hayti,  of  whatever  colour.  It  was  further  declared,  that  no 
one  was  worthy  of  being  a  Haytian,  who  was  not  a  good  father, 
a  good  son,  a  good  husband,  and  especially  a  good  soldier; 
parents  were  not  allowed  to  disinherit  their  children  ;  and  every 
citizen  was  required  to  profess  some  mechanic  art. 

The  empire  of  Hayli,  one  and  indivisible,  was  divided  into 
six  military  divl-iions,  with  a  general  over  each,  who  was  to  be 
independent  of  the  others,  and  to  correspond  directly  with  the 
head  of  the  government.  The  government  was  vested  in  a  first 
magistrate,  to  be  called  Emperor  and  Commander-in-chief 
of  the  Army:  and  Jean  Jacq,ues  Dessalines,  "the  avenger 
and  deliverer  of  his  fellow-citizens,"  was  appointed  to  this  office. 
"  The  title  of  Majesty"  was  conferred  upon  him,  as  well  as  up- 
on ''  his  august  spouse,  the  Empress.*'  Their  persons  were  de- 
clared inviolable,  and  the  crown  elective  ;  but  the  emperor  was 
empowered  to  nominate  his  successor,  for  whom  a  suitable  pro- 
vision was  to  be  made.  An  annual  income  was  to  be  assigned 
to  the  empress  for  life  ;  and  "  to  the  children  acknowledged  by 
his  majesty  :"  and  his  sons  were  to  pass  successively  from  rank 
to  rankin  the  army.  Any  emperor  aitachingto  himself  any  privi- 
leged body  under  the  name  of  guards  of  honour,  or  any  other 
name,  was  to  be  deemed,  ipso  facto,  at  war  with  the  community, 
and  to  be  removed  from  the  throne,  which  was  to  be  filled  by  one 
chosen  by  the  counsellors  of  state  from  among  themselves. 
The  emperor  was  to  make,  seal,  and  promulgate  the  laws ;  to 
appoint  and  remove  at  his  pleasure,  all  public  functionaries; 
to  direct  the  receipt  and  expenditure  of  the  state,  together  with 


JSEW    CONSTITUTION.  191 

the  coinage;  to  make  peace  or  war;  to  form  treaties;  to  dis- 
tribute, at  pleasure,  the  armed  force  ;  and  to  have  the  sole  pow- 
er of  absolving  criminals,  or  comuiuting  their  punishtnent. 

The  generals  of  division  and  brigade  were  to  conipose  the 
council  of  state.  There  was  to  be  a  minister  of  finance,  hav- 
ing charge  of  the  interior  department;  a  minister  of  war,  hav- 
ing the  marine  department;  and  a  secretary  of  state. 

All  "persons  might  decide  their  differences  amicably,  by  arbi- 
tration. Each  commune  was  to  have  a  justice  of  peace,  with  a 
jurisdiction  extending  to  suits  of  not  more  than  one  hundred 
dollars,  and  with  a  right  to  appeal  of  a  district  tribunal.  Mili- 
tary crimes  were  subjected  to  special  councils. 

JNo  predominant  religion  was  admitted.  Freedom  of  worship 
was  tolerated.  The  state  was  not  to  provide  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  any  religious  institution. 

State  crimes  were  to  be  judged  by  a  council  appointed  by 
the  emperor.  All  houses  of  citizens  were  declared  inviolable. 
All  property  belonging  to  any  white  Frenchman  was  claimed 
as  the  property  of  the  state.  Marriage  was  declared  to  be  an 
act  purely  civil,  and  divorce  was  allo».ved  in  certain  cases. 

This  constitution  was  placed  under  the  safe-guard  of  magis- 
trates, fathers  and  mothers,  citizens  and  soldiers ;  and  recom- 
mended to  their  descendants,  "and  to  the  friends  of  liberty, 
to  philanthropists  of  all  countries,  as  a  signal  pledge  of  the 
goodness  of  God,  who  in  the  course  of  his  immortal  decrees, 
bad  given  them  an  opportunity  of  breaking  their  fetters-  and  of 
constituting  themselves  a  people  free,  civilfzed,  and  indepen- 
dent." It  was  accepted  by  the  emperor,  and  ordered  to  be  im- 
mediately put  in  force. 

Whatever  wisdom  or  folly  may  be  thought  to  characterize 
this  constitution,  it  certainly  was  no  contemptible  effort  of 
legislation  for  the  persons  by  whom  it  was  framed,  and  was 
not  ill  adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  the  people  for  whom  it  was 
designed.  If  the  moral  and  amiable  qualities  of  the  sovereign 
had  been  equal  to  his  military  talent  and  courage,  the  adminis- 
tatlon  of  this  constitution  would  probably  have  been  attended 
with  much  individual  happiness  and  national  prosperity.    Nor 


192  HISTORTf  OP  ST.  DOMINGO. 

can  it  be  denied  that  a  considerable  degree  of  general  happi- 
ness was  actually  enjoyed. 

The  condition  and  treatment  of  the  cultivators  were  the  same 
as  under  the  system  of  Toussaint.  They  worked  for  wages, 
which  were  fixed  at  one-fourth  of  the  produce.  Provisions  of 
all  kinds  were  abundant.  There  were  no  whips,  not  even  for 
punishment.  Idleness  was  treated  as  a  crime,  but  was  only 
punished  by  confinement.  They  worked  in  general  very  regu- 
larly and  contentedly,  about  two-tliirds  as  much  as  in  tlie  days 
of  slavery.  It  was  expected  that  they  should  work  on  the  es- 
tates to  which  they  had  been  formerly  attached;  but  if  they  had 
any  plausible  reason  for  changing,  the  commissary,  or  com- 
manding officer  of  the  district,  gave  them  leave.  Most  of  the 
estates  were  in  the  hands  of  the  government,  as  confiscated,  but 
were  let  at  an  annual  rent.  The  rent  was  generally  fixed  ac- 
cording to  the  number  of  cultivators,  without  respect  to  the 
quantity  of  land.  Mulattoesand  mustees,  who  could  trace  any 
relationship,  though  illegitimate,  to  the  old  white  proprietors, 
were  admitted  as  heirs  to  their  estates.  The  mustees,  or  chil- 
dren of  whites  and  inulattoes,  were  very  numerous. 

The  sugar  plantations  having  been  mostly  destroyed,  and  the 
necessary  works  and  buildings  for  its  manufacture  not  having 
been  rebuilt,  very  little  sugar  was  made.  The  chief  produce 
was  cofiVe  :  the  crop  of  1805  exceeded  thirty  millions  of  pnunds, 
which  would  load  about  fifty  ordinary  ships.  There  was  also  in 
the  island  a  considerable  quantity  of  mahogany  and  other  valu- 
able timber. 

In  a  census,  taken  in  1805,  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  part  of 
the  island  under  the  government  of  Dessalines,  the  returns  were 
about  380,000 ;  to  which,  perhaps,  not  less  than  20,000  should 
be  added  for  those  who,  from  dispersion  or  other  causes,  were 
not  included  in  the  returns  :  so  that  the  whole  population  at  that 
time  might  be  considered  at  about  400,000  :  of  these  the  adult 
males  constituted  too  small  a  pr(»portion.  The  slaughter  had 
fallen  chiefly  upon  them.  The  majority  of  cultivators  were 
women.  Marriage,  solemnized  according  to  the  rites  of  the 
Roman  church,  was  almost  universal,  and  its  duties  were  in  gen- 
eral well  observed.    The  emperor,  however,  was  licentious-. 


DEFENCE.   PHBLIC  WORSHIP.         193 

The  regular  army  consisted  of  15,000  men,  of  whom  1500 
were  cavalry.  They  were  well  disciplined  and  armed,  but  bad- 
ly clothed.  The  uniform  was  blue,  turned  up  '.vith  red.  In 
addition  to  this  force,  almost  all  the  adult  males  fit  for  service 
were  trained  as  a  militia ;  there  being,  for  that  purpose,  four  regu- 
lar times  of  exercise  in  a  year,  during  which  they  were  embodied 
for  several  days. 

Since  the  expulsion  of  the  French,  Dessalines  had  been  very 
anxious  to  prevent  any  diminution  of  their  numbers  by  further 
emigration.  The  severest  penalties  were  denounced  against 
those  who  should  take  any  citizen  of  Hayti  from  the  island  ; 
and  he  acquiesced  in  the  conduct  of  the  British  cruizers,  which 
would  not  suffer  vessels  belonging  to  the  island  to  go  beyond 
certain  limits  from  the  shore,  because  he  found  it  greatly  condu- 
cive to  what  he  deemed  a  most  important  object. 

The  negroes  were  not  without  apprehensions  that  the  French 
would  seize  the  first  interval  of  peace  with  Britain,  or  other 
favourable  opportunity,  to  make  another  effort  for  their  subju- 
gation. The  plan  for  defending  their  liberty  and  lives  in  the 
event  of  another  invasion,  bad  been  deliberately  settled  by  Des- 
salines and  the  other  chiefs,  and  the  requisite  preparations  were 
made  for  carrying  it  into  execution. 

On  the  first  appearance  of  an  invading  force,  the  towns  which 
were  all  on  the  coast,  were  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  negro  army 
to  retreat  to  forts  built  in  very  strong  positions  in  the  interior  of 
the  country.  The  positions  they  had  chosen  were  well  selected, 
and  strongly  fortified.  The  artillery  of  the  Cape,  which  con- 
sisted, chiefly  of  brass  cannon,  and  was  in  great  abundance,  had 
been  removed  to  these  hill  forts,  where  great  magazines  of  am- 
munition were  also  collected.  The  sides  of  the  hills,  and 
ravines  connecting  them,  were  all  cleared,  and  planted 
with  bananas,  plaintains,  yams,  and  other  native  provisions, 
which  flourished  so  much,  and  were  so  quickly  re-produc- 
ed, that  they  calculated  on  the  garrison's  being  subsisted 
W'ithout  foraging  beyond  the  reach  of  their  guns.  Many  of  the 
hills  were  of  a  conical  form,  with  an  agreeable  ascent,  on  the 

26 


194  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

summit  of  which  the  forts  were  constructed,  so  as  to  sweep  the 
sides  to  the  utmost  range  of  caimi)n  shot,  and,  as  they  beHeved, 
to  make  il  iinj)ossible  for  an  enemy  to  cut  otT  their  communica- 
tion with  tliese  native  magazines.  These  positions  were  also 
well  supplied  with  water,  the  want  of  which  had  obliged  Dessa- 
lines,  in  Toussaint's  war,  to  abandon  the  strong  position  of 
Crete-a  Pierrott. 

There  was  a  sufficient  number  of  priests,  not  only  from  the 
French  clergy  who  remained  and  were  spared  in  the  massacre, 
but  from  a  considerable  supply  of  Spanisli  ecclesiastics  who  had 
been  brought,  or  induced  to  migrate,  from  the  other  division 
of  the  island,  to  render  the  celebration  of  public  worship  very 
general.  On  all  public  day*'*  as  well  as  Sundays,  prayers  or 
mass,  began  and  ended  the  solemnities  of  the  day.  Whether 
from  policy  or  any  better  motive,  Dessalines  protected  the 
clergy,  and  paid  a  decorous  attention  to  the  exterior  forms  of 
the  church.  All  children  were  brought  to  the  font ;  and  such 
religion  as  popery  amounts  to,  was  an  object  of  public  and  gene- 
ral interest. 

Considerable  attention  was  paid  to  the  subject  of  education. 
Schools  were  established  in  ahnost  every  district.  Seeing  the 
ascendency  of  those  who  had  been  educated,  the  negroes  were 
exceedingly  anxious  for  the  instruction  of  their  children  ;  and 
the  young  Haytians  were  very  generally  taught  to  read  and 
write. 

Dessalines,  at  the  time  of  the  insurrection  in  1791,  was  slave 
to  a  negro,  whose  name  was  Dessalines,  and  Jean  Jacques  took 
that  surname  from  him.  This  man  was  living  in  Cape  Francjois, 
to  witness  his  former  slave  become  his  sovereign.  He  was  a 
shingler,  or  what  in  this  country  would  be  called  a  tiler  ;  and  the 
future  emperor  had  worked  with  him  at  that  trade.  He  used 
to  say,  that  the  emperor  had  always  been  ''a  stubborn  dog,  but 
a  good  workman."  Dessalines  retained  a  great  affection  for 
his  raajSter,  and  appointed  him  to  the  office  of  his  chief  butler. 
When  asked  whether  he  could  find  no  more  honourable  station 
for  hitn  .'^  he  answered,  none  that  the  old  man  would  have  liked 
half  so  well.     He  was  highly  gratified  with  the  appointment,  and 


CHARACTER    OP    DESSALINES.  195 

made  amends  for  the  abstemiousness  of  the  emperor  who, 
though  he  kept  a  good  cellar,  drank  nothing  but  water. 

Des^alines  couhl  not  read,  but  had  learned  to  sign  his  name. 
He  employed  a  reader,  and  used  to  sit  in  a  most  attentive  atti- 
tude to  hear  the  papers  that  were  read  to  him.  Among  those, 
some  of  Mr.  Wijbeiforce's  speeches  on  the  slave  trade,  were 
translated  and  printed  by  his  order  in  the  Gazette  of  Cape  Fran- 
cois. 

This  sovereign  of  Hayti  was  short  in  stature,  hut  strongly 
made  ;  of  great  activity  and  undaunted  courage.  His  military 
talents  were  thought  superior  to  those  of  Toussaint;  but  in  gene- 
ral capacity  he  was  very  inferior  to  that  ill-fated  chief,  and  could 
not  be  considfred  as  rising  above  mediocrity.  ,He  commanded 
great  respect,  but  it  was  chiefly  by  the  ternjr  he  inspired.  Yet 
sometimes  he  was  open  and  affable,  and  could  even  be  gene- 
rous. He  was  distinguished  by  some  strange  caprices,  evident- 
ly the  effect  of  personal,  vanity.  He  was  fond  of  embroidery 
and  other  ornaments,  and  dressed  often  with  much  magnifi- 
cenre.  at  least  according  to  his  ovi^n  taste  :  yet  sometinjes  he 
would  exhibit  himself  publicly  in  the  meanest  clothes  he  could 
find.  But  what  was  still  more  singular  and  ridiculous,  he  had 
a  gieat  ambition  to  be  an  accomplished  dancer;  and  actually 
carried  about  with  him  a  dancing  master  in  his  suite,  to  give  him 
lessons  at  leisure  hours.  Nor  was  it  possible  to  pay  him  a  more 
acceptable  compliment,  than  to  tell  him  that  he  danced  well, 
though,  different  from  the  negroes  in  general,  he  was  very 
awkward  at  that  exercise 

He  had  daughters  by  a  former  wife,  but  no  son.  His  present 
wife  had  been  the  favourite  mistress  of  a  rich  planter,  at  whose 
expense  she  had  been  well  educated  She  was  one  of  the  most 
handsome  and  accomplished  negresses  in  the  West  Indies ;  her 
disposition  was  highly  amiable,  and  she  used  her  utmost  endea- 
vours to  soften  the  natural  ferocity  of  her  husband,  though  un- 
happily witti  little  success. 

His  cruelties  were  not  confined  to  the  whites.  Suspicions 
and  jealousies  constituted  a  sufficient  inducement  to  him  to  de- 
prive of  life  many  of  his  own  subjects  and  officers,  without  even 


196  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

the  formality  of  a  trial:  and  every  attempt  thus  to  terminate 
danger  and  suspicion,  tending,  in  the  natural  order  of  things 
only  to  increase  them,  his  conduct  was  at  length  distinguished 
by  all  the  caprices  and  atrocities  of  tyranny.  These  crimes 
inevitably  suggested  projects  for  their  counteraction.  He  was 
conspired  against  by  his  army,  and  arrested  ojost  unexpectedly 
at  the  head  quarters,  on  the  17th  of  October,  1806,  when,  in 
struggling  to  escape,  he  received  a  blow  which  terminated  his 
tyranny  and  his  life. 


CHAP.  XII. 

FROai  OCTOBER,  1806,  TO  THE  ACT  OF  THE  COUNCIL  OF  STATE 
ESTABLISHING  ROYALTY,  AND  CONFERRING  ON  CHRISTOPHE 
THE    TITLE    OP    KING,    IN    181  I. 

Christophe  assumes  the  government  at  Cape  Francois. — Character 
and  anecdotes  of  him. — Proclamation  on  his  accession. — Petion  as- 
sumes the  government  at  Port-au-Prince. — Some  account  of  him. 

Fierce  contest  between  these  two  rivals. — Battle. — Petion  defeated. 
— Christophe  besieges  Port-au-Prince^  but  soon  retires. — Calls  a 
council  at  Cape  Frangois. — New  constitution  formed. — Outline  of  if. 
The  title  of  president  given  to  Christophe. — His  proclamation  on 
the  publication  of  the  new  constitution  — He  frustrates  a  conspiracy 
for  the  disturbance  of  Jamaica. — Sanguinary  war  between  Chris- 
tophe and  Petion. — The  surrender  of  the  Mole  of  St.  Nicholas  to 
Christophe,  followed  by  a  cessation  of  hostilities. — Friendly  com- 
munications between  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island  and  the  part 
under  the  government  of  Christophe  — The  French  expelled  from  the 
city  of  St.  Domingo. — The  title  of  king  given  to  Christophe  by  an 
act  of  the  Council  of  State. 

The  removal  of  Dessallnes  gave  general  satisfaction  to  the 
people  ;  who  had  become  completely  weary  of  his  tyranny  : 
and  it  was  indeed  a  very  auspicious  event  for  the  liberties  and 
happiness  of  the  negro  state.  Christophe,  whose  name  has 
been  mentioned  in  several  preceding  chapters  of  this  history, 
and  who  since  the  expulsion  of  the  French,  had  been  second 
in  command,  immediately  assumed  the  supreme  power. 

Henry  Christophe  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  the  island  of 
Grenada,  and  to  have  been  a  slave  in  St.  Domingo  at  the  revo- 
lution in  1791.  He  had  been  an  early  friend  and  faithful  adhe- 
rent of  Toussaint,  to  whom  he  displayed  considerable  similarity 
of  character.  He  was  known  to  be  a  man  of  j^reat  bravery  and 
military  skill,  and  his  disposition  was  generally  considered  as  very 


198  HISTORtr   OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

bumane  and  benevolent ;  though  many  have  since  represented 
it  as  severe  and  sanguinary.  He  had  the  character  of  being  a 
good  husband,  and  a  good  father,  and  observant  of  the  duties  of 
morality  and  the  offices  of  religion.  He  was  eminent  for  hospi- 
tality, kept  good  wine,  and  partook  of  it  freely,  though  not  to 
excess.  As  commander-in-chief  at  Cape  Fian^ois,  he  often 
gave  public  dinners,  and  his  entertainments  were  handsome,  nojt 
to  say  magnificent.  Officers  of  the  British  navy,  as  well  as 
foreign  merchants,  were  frequently  among  his  guests.  He  had 
a  propriety  and  even  dignity  of  manner  seldom  attained  by  an 
uneducated  man.  He  evinced  considerable  strength  of  natural 
talent ;  used  to  speak  in  the  assembly  of  the  islands  in  a  very  able 
and  forcible  manner ;  and  understood  the  English  language 
enough  to  converse  in  it  with  ease. 

Christophe  had  once  an  opportunity  of  shewing  his  good 
sense  and  moderation  of  temper,  at  the  expense  of  the  captain 
of  a  British  man-of-war.  This  officer  had  the  command  of  a 
ship  on  the  Jamaica  station,  and  was  frequently  on  shore  at 
Cape  Francois,  where  his  countrymen  had  always  been  treated 
with  the  greatest  respect.  He  went  one  night  to  the 'theatre, 
which  continued  open  till  the  time  of  the  massacre  ;  and  took 
with  him  a  large  party  of  marines.  When  the  seamen,  at  a  late 
hour,  were  returning  to  their  boats,  the  black  sentinel  on  the 
wharf  stopped  one  of  them  who  carried  a  large  bag  or  sack  ;  it 
being  contrary  to  the  regulations  that  any  goods  should  be  con- 
veyed from  the  shore  at  night.  The  boatmen  would  not  give 
way  to  the  sentinel,  who  gave  the  alarm  ;  and  the  news  of  the 
dispute  being  carried  to  the  theatre,  the  captain  marched  his 
marines  to  the  wharf,  and,  instead  of  paying  respect  to  the  laws, 
was  very  outrageous  with  the  black  soldiery.  Christophe,  be- 
ing then  sent  for,  hastened  to  the  place  to  prevent  mischief.  On 
his  arrival,  he  gently  and  respectfully  expostulated  with  the  cap- 
tain, on  the  impropriety  of  breaking  through  the  necessary  regu- 
lations of  the  harbour.  "You,  and  your  officers,  and  people," 
said  he,  "  may  go  on  board  at  any  hour  you  please,  though  e^en 
this  is  contrary  to  rule  ;  but  the  sentinel  did  right,  and  must  be 
supported,  in  preventing  the  embarkation  of  any  goods  at  this 


POLICY  OF  CHRISTOPHB.  199 

hour."  In  return,  the  captain  loaded  the  black  chief  with  abu- 
sive epitbetSj  and  used  other  language  of  the  most  offensive  kind. 
A  word  or  a  sign  from  Christopbe  would  have  been  certain 
destruction  to  the  whole  party  ;  but  he  preserved  the  most  per- 
fect self-command,  and  reproved  the  vulgar  insolence  of  the 
captain  with  a  dignified  moderation  ;  saying,  "You  are  a  dis- 
grace to  the  English  navy  ;  but  I  shall  not  judge  of  your  coun- 
trymen in  general  from  you.  I  consider,  and  shall  treat  you,  as 
a  boy.  Go  off  in  safety  ;  but  learn  to  behave  yourself  better  in 
time  to  come."  This  captain  refrained  from  landing  any  more, 
and  his  brother  officers,  in  general,  kept  aloof  from  the  island. 
But  their  successors,  of  the  next  squadron  which  arrived  on  that 
station,  were  on  very  good  terms  with  the  Haytians,  often  enter- 
ed the  harbour  of  Cape  Fran(jois,  and  were  hospitably  and  hand- 
somely entertained  by  Christopbe  and  the  other  black  chiefs. 

The  regulations  adopted  by  Christopbe  on  his  accession  to 
the  sovereignty,  displayed  great  good  sense,  and  a  mind  much 
enlightened  on  subjects  of  general  policy.  Discarditig  the 
pompous  titlfi  of  emperor,  he  contented  himself  with  the  mo- 
dest designation  of  Chief  of  the  Government  of  Hayti ;  and  im- 
mediately made  various  beneficial  arrangements  on  the  subject  of 
foreign  commerce,  as  well  as  with  respect  to  the  internal  affairs  of 
the  island.  The  following  passages  of  a  proclamation,  addressed 
by  him  to  neutral  nations,  and  dated  October  the  24th,  1806,  ex- 
hibited a  pleasing  and  correct  account  of  the  flourishing  state  of 
cultivation,  and  pointed  out  the  line  of  conduct  which  he  pro- 
posed to  pursue. 

"  Our  whole  attention  is  now  turned  to  the  cultivation  of 
valuable  produce.  Our  industry  has  procured  us  a  most  abun- 
dant recompense  for  our  exertions.  The  riches  of  our  soil  offer 
a  pleasing  prospect  to  your  speculations.  Our  warehouses,  filled 
with  all  the  productions  of  the  A.ntilles,  only  wait  the  arrival  of 
your  fleets,  to  make  an  exchange  of  the  manufactures  which  we 
need,  for  those  which  you  require.  If  a  system  unfavourable  to 
the  progress  of  commerce  has  hitherto  interposed  to  prevent 
its  success  among  us,  that  disastrous  influence  will  shortly  cease. 
So  far  is  our  government,  in  its  present  slate,  from  opposing 


200  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

tjbe  freedom  of  commerce  in  our  ports,  that  it  offers  facilities  to 
you,  which  cannot  be  granted  by  any  other  jEjovernment.  It  is 
of  no  consequence'  under  what  colours  you  may  appear ;  the 
protection  of  your  property,  the  security  of  your  persons,  and  a 
rigid  maintenance  of  the  laws  in  every  thing  that  relates  to  you, 
are  guaranteed  to  you  on  the  faith  of  government.  Duties  ar- 
ranged in  proportion  to  the  difficulties  that  you  may  experience 
in  gaining  our  ports,  and  equitably  collected  ;  great  dispatch  in 
expediting  your  vessels;  with  men  of  integrity  in  the  direction 
of  the  public  offices :  such  are  the  changes  on  which  you  may 
have  a  perfect  reliance.  The  government  has  already  directed 
the  suppression  of  exclusive  consignments ;  of  the  tax  on  the 
price  of  articles  ;  of  the  privileges  granted  for  the  sale  of  coffee; 
as  well  as  the  objection  to  take  cargoes  of  sugar,  &c.  Every 
one  will  be  at  liberty  to  sell  and  to  buy  on  the  conditions  that  he 
shall  judge  most  for  his  advantage.  Those  regulations,  pro- 
duced by  ignorance,  will  no  longer  offer  impediments  to  your 
speculation  :  your  confidence  will  no  longer  be  forced  in  favour 
of  individuals,  who  were  equally  strangers  to  you  and  the  wel- 
fare of  their  country.*  Your  friends,  your  own  particular  fac- 
tors, shall  have  the  possession  of  your  property  ;  and  the  govern- 
ment engages  to  grant  them  all  the  protection  which  they  can 
desire.  The  sanguinary  horrors  which  have  too  notoriously 
marked  the  commencement  of  a  cruel  reign,  will  no  more  renew 
the  sad  spectacle  of  scenes  that  are  past.  Come  with  perfect 
confidence  to  traffic  in  our  ports  :  come  and  change  the  fruits 
of  your  industry  for  our  riches  ;  and  be  persuaded,  that  you  will 
never  have  cause  to  repent  of  a  reliance  on  us. 

"  At  the  same  time,  while  the  government  is  exerting  all  its 
efforts  to  procure  you  the  advantages  of  a  brilliant  commerce, 
it  requires  of  your  agents  the  same  loyalty  and  good  faith  which 
it  will  exercise  towards  you.  It  also  expresses  its  hope  that  the 
base  conduct  of  the  privateers  of  Louisiana  will  not  be  imita- 
ted ;  and  that  it  will  have  no  cause  to  regret  that  its  too  great 
confidence  has  been  abused. 

*  Dessalines  had  appointed  Patent  Commissioners,  who  alone  had  the  right  of 
selling  the  cargoes  that  were  imported. 


PETION    OPPOSES    CHRISTOPHE.  201 

'•'  The  ports  are — The  Cape,  Fort  Dauphin,  Port  Paix,  Co- 
naives,  St.  Marc,  Port-au-Prince,  Aux  Cayes,  Jereniie,  and  Jac- 
mel  ;  where  you  may  send  your«cargoes  with  the  certainty  of 
an  advantageous  return. 

"  The  well  known  exactness  with  which  the  government  of 
Hayti  fulfils  its  engagements,  is  a  solemn  pledge  for  the  execu- 
tion of  the  treaties  it  may  enter  into  with  you.  Notwithstanding  the 
misfortunes  which  preceded  our  independence,  and  the  disastrous 
wars  which  it  necessarily  produced,  the  means  of  government 
have  never  failed  of  keeping  pace  with  its  wants.  Such  is  the 
extent  of  our  resources,  that  even  the  vices  of  the  preceding 
administration  did  not  prevent  the  liquidation  of  all  its  contracts. 
Judge  then,  what  will  now  be  our  prospect  as  well  as  yours, 
when  a  wise  ecpnomy  shall  take  the  place  of  prodigality,  and  an 
equitable  collection  of  the  revenues  will  determine  the  rights  of 
government  as  well  as  those  of  individuals." 

The  tranquillity  of  the  country  was  soon  disturbed  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  another  candidate  for  sovereign  power,  in  the  per- 
son of  Petion.  Petion  was  a  mulatto  general,  who,  on  the  de- 
cease of  Clerveaux,  had  succeeded  to  the  rank  of  third  in  com- 
mand ;  and,  at  the  death  of  Dessalines  was  commander-in-chief 
at  Port-au-Prince,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  which  that  event 
took  place.  He  was  educated  at  the  military  academy  of  Paris, 
and  known  to  be  a  man  of  letters,  of  mild  disposition,  and  en- 
gaging manners.  He  was  the  principal  engineer  anjong  the 
blacks,  and  was  thought  very  expert  in  most  branches  of  the 
military  art. 

Each  chief,  in  support  of  bis  claim,  had  recourse  to  arms; 
various  encounters  took  place  ;  and  the  struggle  between  them 
soon  became  very  fierce.  On  the  first  of  January,  1807,  a  bat- 
tle was  fought  between  the  two  armies ;  when  Petion  was  defeat- 
ed, and  obliged  to  save  himself  by  flight,  and  Christophe  pur- 
sued him  to  the  gates  of  Port-au-Prince.  In  hope  of  com- 
pleting the  triumph  over  his  rival,  Christophe  laid  siege  to  that 
city  ;  but  the  necessity  of  his  presence  in  order  to  the  establish- 
ment of  his   authority  in   other  parts,  generally  favourable  to 

bitii,  but  not  without  partial  disaffection  to  his  cause;  together  with 

27 


202  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

an  apprehension  that  the  conquest  of  the  city,  if  practicable, 
would  require  a  hms:  timf  and  great  sacrifices  ;  induced  him  to 
raise  the  si*  ge,  and  retire  towtrds  Cape  Franc^ois. 

He  found  no  difficulty  in  ebtablishing  his  sway  over  the  north- 
ern districts  of  the  island  ;  the  success  of  his  first  can)paign 
placed  his  power  on  too  firm  a  foundation  to  be  shaken  by  any 
subsequent  atten»pts  of  his  rival  in  the  south.  \i\  his  several 
addresses  to  the  army  and  people,  he  nianifesled  a  spirit,  which, 
though  modestly  flushed  with  victory,  was  chastened  by  the 
warmest  pnnci[)les  of  rectitude  and  philanthropy  ;  by  a  d»  sire  to 
heal  the  wounds  of  bis  distracted  country.  ar)d  t(t  proniote  its 
agriculture,  its  commerce,  its  wealth,  and  its  happiness. 

A  council  was  speedily  convened  at  Cape  Francois,  compos- 
ed of  the  generals  and  principal  citizens  ;  who  formed  a  new 
constitution  for  the  fuluie  government,  which  was  published  on 
the  I7th  of  February,  1807.  This  constitution  d.eclared,  that 
every  person  residing  on  the  territory  of  Hayti  was  free,  in  the 
fullest  sense  ;  and  tliai  slavery  was  for  ever  abolished  in  Hayti. 
The  government  was  vested  in  a  chief  magistrate,  who  was  to 
lake  the  title  and  quality  of  president  and  generalissimo  of  the 
forces  both  by  sea  and  land.  This  office  was  for  life  ;  biit  the 
president  had  a  rii!;ht  to  choose  his  successor,  from  among  his 
generals  only.  The  usual  powers  were  conferred  on  the  chief 
magistrate  in  respect  to  foreign  treaties,  as  well  as  peace  and 
war.  The  council  of  state  consisted  of  nine  members,  of  whom 
two-thirds  were  to  be  generals.  Tiiis  council,  was  a  delibeiative 
body.  The  government,  therefore,  approached  nearly  to  an 
oligarchy)  having  however  the  strongest  features  of  a  nionarchi- 
cal  preponderance,  though  without  the  name  of  royalty  ;  the 
appointment  of  members  of  the  council  being  confided  to  the 
president.  W  ise  rules  and  arrangements  were  made  for  a  speedy 
administration  of  justice  ;  and,  notwithstanding  regular  judges 
were  appointed,  it  was  optional  to  every  citizen  to  refer  his 
cause  to  arbitration  ;  a  species  6f  appeal  which  certainly  leaves 
every  case  open  to  the  decision  of  hunjan  wisdom  and  equity, 
unfettered  by  the  shackles  of  sweeping  rejgulations.  The  Ro- 
man catholic  religion  was  declared  to  be  that  of  the  state  j  but 


PROCLAMATION    OF    CHRISTOPHE.  20o 

the  exercise  of  every  other  was  to  be  tolerated.  Schools  were 
to  be  established  in  lach  district,  and  every  Haytian,  from  six- 
teen years  of  age  to  fifty,  was  liable  to  military  service.  It  was 
carefully  announced  as  a  fundamental  part  of  the  act  of  state, 
thai  the  government  would  give  no  ^disturbance  to  the  colonies  of 
other  nations^  and  that  the  Haytians  would  make  no  conquests 
out  of  tlieir  own  island  * 

On  the  day  on  which  this  constitution  was  published,  Chris- 
toplie  issued  the  following  proclamation  : — 

"  Henry  Cbristophe,  President  and  Generalissimo  of  the 
Military  and  Naval  Forces  of  the  State  of  Hayti,  to  the  army 
and  people, 

"  The  light  has  broken  in  upon  us,  and  a  beneficent  constitu- 
tion has  put  an  end  to  the  plots  and  machinations,  of  which  you 
were  on  the  point  of  becoming  victims.  A  wise  code,  adap- 
ted to  our  manners,  our  climate,  and  our  customs,  has  sprung, 
as  it  may  be  said,  out  of  chaos,  and  fixed  once  more  the  desti- 
nies of  Hayti. 

"  r^ong  had  I  in  vain  sought  to  present  you  with  this  precious 
gift :  in  vain  did  1  assemble  the  districts,  and  urge  them  to  send 
deputies  to  Porl-au  Prince,  to  give  you  a  constitution.  My 
anxiety,  instead  of  being  followed  with  the  desired  success,  only 
operateil  as  an  additional  incitement  to  the  factious  to  pervert 
the  public  opinion,  and  to  establish  a  constitution  favourable  to 
their  interests,  and  those  of  their  adherents,  but  as  hostile  to 
the  liberty  of  the  people,  as  it  was  to  the  principles  of  sound 
reason. 

''  rellow-citizens,  you  have  all  been  witnesses  to  the  purity  of 
my  views,  and  the  sincerity  of  my  intentions.  You  know  how 
this  sincerity  has  been  abused  by  the  miscreants  who  fomented 
revolt,  and  kindled  civil  war.  'I'heir  efforts  never  intimidated 
me  for  a  single  moment,  or  diverted  me  from  my  design  of  serv- 
ing my  country.  By  night  or  by  day  I  have  never  ceased  to  occu- 
py myself  in  providing  for  the  public  safety.     What  have  1  not 

^  See  Appendix  iV. 


204  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

done  to  effect  it  ?     What  have  I  not   suffered   in  counteracting 
the  secret  wiles  and  plots  of  the  factious? 

"  I  have  always  been  in  the  midst  of  you  ;  and  you  can  say 
whether  tny  conduct  has  ever  been  influenced,  or  my  honour 
tarnished,  by  ambition.  Invested  with  the  supreme  power, 
this  day,  by  thevvi.-h  of  my  fellovv-cilizens  and  niy  companions 
in  arms,  I  have  yielded  to  their  desires :  and  I  have  consented 
to  bear  this  weighty  but  honourable  burden,  because  it  was 
their  wish  that  it  should  be  trusted  to  my  hands,  and  because  I 
am  willing  again  to  serve  my  country.  Happy  shall  I  be,  if  my 
efforts  are  crowned  with  success,  and  if  they  tend  to  the  happi- 
ness of  my  fellow-citizens ! 

"But  to  attain  this,  my  efforts  alone  will  not  be  sufficient. 

"The  laws  and  constitution  which  have  just  been  presented 
to  you  must  be  observed.  It  provides  for  the  religious  preser- 
vation of  your  rights  :  it  secures  to  every  citizen  his  personal 
liberty,  his  right  of  property,  and  that  of  his  family. 

"  The  fatal  consequences  of  the  wars  in  which  we  have  been 
engaged,  and  still  more  the  immoral  example  held  out  to  us  by 
the  French,  had  almost  destroyed  every  principle  of  religion. 
The  nroral  system  was  publicly  laughed  at;  and  a  corrupted 
youth  abandoned  itself,  without  remorse,  to  all  the  licentious- 
ness of  its  age  :  public  education  was  degraded,  and  confined 
to  mercenary  instructors. 

"  It  was  necessary  to  restore  to  religion  its  dignity, — to  cause 
it  to  be  respected  and  cheiished.  It  was  necessary  to  revive 
morality,  to  give  it  due  distinction;  to  inculcate  into  the  minol 
of  youth  its  sacred  principles,  and  those  of  honour  also ;  in 
short,  to  convince  the  people,  that  without  religion  and  morali- 
ty, human  society  could  not  exist. 

"  Your  interests  will  be  secured  to  you  by  proper  tribunals  : 
the  judgments  pronounced  by  their  ministers  will  be  dictated  by 
equity  and  justice.  It  remains  for  the  people  of  Hayli  to  make 
themselves  distinguished  by  their  probity  and  good  faith.  Es- 
spntially  a  trading  country,  as  well  from  its  situation  as  fr'om  the 
nature  of  the  commodities  it  produces,  it  is  necessary  that  it 
should  attract  the  mer-chants  of  every  country  on  the  globe, 
both  by  its  equity  and  its  produce. 


PROCLAMATION    OF    CHKISTOPHE.        ,  205 

"Trade  being  the  source  of  all  our  wealth,  it  is  important 
tha^the  foieign  merchants  who  frequent  our  ports,  should  be 
equally  protected  with  our  fellow-citizens  ;  and  that  they  should 
receive  all  the  hospitality  due  to  this  useful  class  of  society. 

"To  feed  this  trade,  to  give  it  a  new  spring, — agriculture 
must  be  prosecuted  with  perseverance  and  vigour.  Placed 
under  the  finest  climate  of  the  world,  favoured  by  nature  with 
her  most  precious  gifts,  even  to  profusion,  the  husbandman  has 
not  at  Hayti  to  contend  with  the  rigours  of  a  frozen  clime,  or 
to  fortify  himself  against  the  inclemencies  of  the  seasons.  A 
little  labour  is  sufficient  to  enrich  him,  and  to  place  him  on  a 
level  with  the  manufacturers  of  other  countries.  Exert  your- 
selves, then,  industrious  cultivators,  to  fill  your  warehouses  with 
the  produce  of  our  fertile  soil.  Display  to  the  eyes  of  the  nier- 
chants  of  Europe  all  that  can  tempt  their  desires,  and  you  will 
soon  see  *your  trade  flourish  much  above  your  most  sanguine 
expectations. 

"  After  having  re-established  religion,  defeated  immorality, 
restored  manners,  and  encouraged  agriculture  and  trade,  we  shall 
have  still  great  labours  to  encounter.  We  must  not  neglect  the 
use  of  arms.  The  enemy  watches  our  movements,  and  observes 
our  proceedings.  We  have  as  yet  no  guarantee  of  the  affections 
of  our  friemls.  We  must  bind  the  latter  to  us  by  treaties  ;  we 
must  be  ready  to  meet  the  former  in  the  field.  Abandoned  to 
ourselves,  our  resources  are  in  ourselves.  They  are  in  you, 
soldiers,  who  are  ready  generously  to  spill  your  blood,  sooner 
than  yield  to  a  haughty  enemy  your  liberty,  which  is  the  reward 
of  your  courage  !  They  are  in  you,  inhabitants  and  industrious 
cultivators,  from  whom  the  state  derives  its  wealth  !  It  is  your 
union,  your  submission  to  the  laws,  which  are  to  be  the  cement 
and  bond  of our  independence. 

"  The  line  of  politics  which  foreign  powers  will  pursue  with 
respect  to  us,  is  not  yet  manifested.  Whatever  it  may  be,  let 
us  place  ourselves  in  such  a  situation,  that,  without  holding  out 
any  defiance  to  them,  we  may,  at  the  same  time,  have  nothing 
to  dread  from  those  who  may  entertain  hostile  intentions. 

"  Let  those  who  wish  apolitical  connection  with  us,  or  who 


206  .  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

would  enjoy  the  advanta2;e  of  our  commerce,  find  an  equitable 
reciprocity      To  the  rest  let  us  only  offer  death  and  battle.  , 

"  At  the  same  time  that  we  are  occupied  with  these  thous^hts, 
let  us  never  forget  that  the  safety  of  a  free  people  is  best  main- 
tained by  arms.  Its  cultivation  employs  a  part  of  our  fellow- 
citiztMis  :  let  us  remember  that  we  are  all  soldiers,  and  that  they 
have  been  warlike  nations  alone  who  have  been  able  to  preserve 
their  liberty.  Let  us  call  to  mind  that  a  handful  of  Greeks,  de- 
voted to  their  couDtry,  confounded  the  rage  of  a  million  of  bar- 
barians, who  endeavoured  to  wrest  from  them  their  liberty. 
Let  us  swear  to  imitate  their  example  :  let  us  swear  to  observe 
our  sacred  constitution,  to  cause  it  to  be  observed,  and  to  perish 
sooner  than  allow  it  to  be  violated  in  the  smallest  degree." 

Cbristophe  had  already  had  an  opportunity  of  evincing  his 
regard  for  good  faith  and  moderation,  and  proving  the  sincerity 
of  his  avowed  determination  to  refrain  from  all  inierferejice 
with  the  colonies  of  other  nations.  Some  restless  spirits  in  the 
southern  part  of  St.  Domingo,  had  opened  a  clandestine  corres- 
pondence with  various  disaffected  persons  in  Jamaica,  with  a  view 
to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  that  Island.  Tbis  intrigue  wasdetect- 
ed  by:tbe  sagacity  and  vigilance  ol  Christoph<^,  who  immediately 
arrested  the  parties  concerned  in  the  conspiracy.  The  British 
ministry  were  so  well  pleased  with  this  demonstration  of  integrity, 
that  they  issued  an  order  of  council,  in  February,  1807  ;  permit- 
ting English  merchantmen  bound  for  Buenos  Ayresand  La  Plata, 
to  dispose  of  their  cargoes  at  any  port  in  St.  Domingo,  which 
was  not  subject  to  France  or  Spain,  to  ship  the  produce  of  the 
country,  and  either  to  return  with  their  investments  to  any  part 
of  the  united  kingdon).or  to  place  them  t)n  board  the  vessels  of 
neutrals,  for  the  purpose  of  selling  them  in  the  foreign  settle- 
ments of  hostile  powers :  and  the  owners  of  the  cargoes  were 
suffered  to  biing  the  proceeds  of  them  in  the  neutral  ships  to  any 
harbour  in  Great  Britain  or  Ireland.  This  act  of  the  British 
government,  showed  the  sense  they  entertained  of  Christophe's 
honourable  conduct,  and  at  the  san)e  time  most  materially  as- 
sisted the  commercial  views  of  the  Haytians,  while  it  revived 


TREATY   WITH    THE   SPANIARDS.  207 

in  no  small  degree  the  depressed  enlerprize  of  British  mer- 
chiints,  and  thus  proved  highly  beneficial  to  all  parties. 

The  struggle  for  sovereignty  still  continued,  and  a  sanguina- 
ry war  was  carried  on  between  the  rival  chiefs  for  several  years. 
Many  battles  were  fought ;  in  some  of  which  the  siandaid  of 
Chrisiuphe  was  victorious,  and  in  others  that  of  Petion.  Much 
territory  and  many  towns  were  successively  occupied  and  evac- 
uated, taken  and  re-taken,  by  the  hostile  armies.  The  towns 
of  St.  Marc,  Arcaljaye,  Gonaives,  and  Port  Paix,  were  scenes 
of  fierce  and  obstinate  conflicts.  But  the  chiel  seat  of  contest 
was  the  Mole  of  St.  Nicholas  ;  where  numerous  exploits  of  pqj:- 
sonal  bravery  were  achieved  on  both  sides.  At  length  this  place, 
which  was  occupied  by  a  part  of  Petion's  army,  was  formally 
invested  by  Christophe  in  person,  and  after  twenty  days  of  regu- 
lar seige,  in  which  two  of  their  commanders  lost  their  lives,  the 
gairison  sui rendered  at  discretion,  and  were  united  to  the  army 
of  the  conqueror.  After  this  event,  which  took  place  in  Octo- 
ber, IS  10,  the  principal  part  of  the  besieging  army  were  allowed 
lo  go  to  their  homes,  and  their  chief  himself  returned  to  Cape 
Franqois. 

Chri-tophe  had  taken  advantage  of  the  state  of  anarchy  which 
prevailed  in  Spain,  to  endeavour  lo  tfftctagood  understanding 
with  the  Spanish  inhabitants  of  Hayti ;  who  manifested  a  cor- 
responding disposition,  and  amicable  and  commercial  relations 
were  accordingly  established  between  them.  Christophe  fur- 
nished some  supplies  of  arms  and  military  stores,  to  assist  in 
their  operations  against  the  French,  who  still  held  two  posts  in 
that  part  of  the  island.  In  November,  1809,  the  town  and  port 
of  Samana,  and  a  number  of  vessels  in  the  harbour,  were  taken 
by  a  small  British  squadron  :  the  French  troops  were  made  pris- 
oners, the  vessels  were  seized  as  prizes,  and  the  place  was  de- 
livered up  to  the  Spaniards.  In  July,  18J0,  a  British  force,  un- 
der the  command  of  General  Carmichael,  went  from  Janiaica 
to  co-operate  in  the  reduction  of  the  city  of  St.  Domingo,  the 
last  post  which  the  French  retained  in  the  island.  At  first,  the 
governor,  Buiquier,  expressed  his  determination  not  to  surren- 
der :  but  when  General  Carmichael  had  made  judicious  and  de° 


208  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

cisive  preparations  to  carry  the  place  by  assault,  the  governor 
thought  proper  to  capitulate.  The  garrison  were  allowed  to 
march  out  with  military  honours,  the  officers  were  sent  to 
France  on  their  parole,  and  the  private  soldiers  became  prison- 
ers of  war.  Thus  the  Spaniards  regained  possession  of  their 
capital,  after  it  had  been  in  the  hands  of  the  French  about  eight 
years. 

In  the  spring  of  the  year  1811,  Christophe  exchanged  the 
title  of  president  for  that  of  king.  This  alteration  was  made 
under  the  authority  of  the  council  of  state,  assembled  at  Cape 
I^ran^ois,  ''  for  the  purpose  of  revising  the  constitution  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1807,  and  deliberating  upon  the  alterations  which  it  re- 
quired." They  professed  to  have  considered  it,  at  the  period 
of  its  formation,  as  very  imperfect,  though  adapted  to  the  exist- 
ing exigencies;  and  declared  the  fit  time  to  be  nnw  come  for 
retouching  and  perfecting  their  work,  an)ending  their  code  of 
laws,  and  fixing  permanently  the  only  mode  of  government 
adapted  to  their  country. 

They  declared  their  own  opinion,  and  thp  opinion  of  the 
people  at  large,  to  be,  that  it  was  necessary  to  establish  an  he- 
reditary monarchy  ;  the  government  of  one  individual  being  the 
least  subjrct  to  troubles  and  reverses,  and  uniting  in  the  highest 
degree  the  power  of  maintairing  their  laws,  protecting  iheir 
rights,  anddefending  tht'ir  liberty  at  home,  and  of  making  them 
respected  abroad  ; — that  the  title  of  governor-general,  confer- 
red upon  Toussaint,  was  not  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  the  su- 
preme magistrate  of  a  country  ;  that  the  title  of  emperor  given 
to  Dessalines  was  inappropriate,  except  to  one  who  possessed 
authority  over  various  states  and  territories;  that  the  title  of 
president  hardly  conveyed  the  idea  of  supreme  power;  and 
that  no  title  was  so  proper  as  that  of  king.  They  further  de- 
clared the  establishment  of  royalty  in  the  person  and  family  of 
the  chief  who  had  governed  them  for  several  years,  with  so 
much  credit  to  himself  and  advantage  to  the  people,  to  be  an 
act  of  necessary  duty  and  national  gratitude. 

With  the  establishment  of  a  throne,  they  decreed  the  foun- 
dation of  rank  of  hereditary  nobility ;  into  which  were  to  be 


ESTABLISHMENT    OF    ROYALTY.  209 

admitted  all  such  di-^tinguished  persons  as  had  rendered  impor- 
tant services  to  their  country,  either  in  the  magistracy  or  tlie 
army,  or  in  the  departments  of  literature  or  science. 

On  this  basis,  the  council  of  state  framed  a  constitutional  act,* 
establisliing  the  regal  dignity  in  the  person  and  family  ofChris- 
tophe,  appointing  the  various  officers  of  state,  and  making  such 
other  additions  to  the  constitution  of  1S07,  as  the  alteration  in 
the  form  of  government  was  thought  to  require.  This  act  was 
soon  after  publicly  promulgated,  and  appears  to  have  been  re- 
ceived by  the  people  at  large  with  general  satisfaction. 

•  See  Appeiidis  V. 


28 


CHAP.  xni. 

FROM  MARCH,  1811,  TO  THE  END  OF  THE  YEAR  1817. 

Christophe  and  Petion  suspend  hostilities^  and  apply  themselves  to  the 
improvement  of  their  people.  —  Coronation  oj  Christophe  —  Regular  or- 
ganization of  his  dominions,  and  those  of  Petion. — The  Frenchman  the 
accession  of  Louis  the  Ei:^hteenth,  entertain  thoughts  of  attempting 
to  recover  the  island  — Absurdity  of  their  expectations  — Sentiments 
and  feelings  of  the  Haytians  on  hearing  of  the  peace  in  Etirope — 
and  aftenvards  on  being  informed  of  the  designs  of  France  against 
their  independence. — Manifesto  of  Christophe. — Commissioners  from 
France  to  gain  information  concerning  Hayti,  and  to  sound  the  dis- 
positions of  the  chiefs. — Correspondence  with  Christophe. — Resolu- 
tions of  the  Council. — Negocintions  with  Petion. — Answer  of  the 
public  autho7'ities. — President's  proclamation . — FrencJi  preparations 
for  an  expedition. — Frustrated  by  the  return  of  Bonaparte. — Over- 
turesfrom  Bonaparte — and  from  the  cabinet  of  Louis  after  his  res- 
toration— all  rejected  with  disdain. —  Patriotic  labours  both  of 
Christophe  and  Petion. — Progress  of  education,  and  prospect  of  its 
general  extension. 

Fn  the  long  and  sanguinary  war  which  had  been  carried  on 
between  the  rival  chiefs,  the  preponderance  of  success  was  ra- 
ther in  favour  of  Christophe  ;  but  their  foices  proved  to  be,  on 
the  whole,  so  nearly  balanced,  as  to  preclude  all  expectation 
that  in  any  short  time  one  would  be  able  to  subdue  the  other. 
In  this  case,  too,  it  could  not  have  escaped  the  observation  of 
either  party,  that  continued  hostilities  would  eventually  have 
enfeebled  them  both,  so  as  to  render  them  an  easy  prey  to  their 
former  oppressors. 

A  Haytian  writer,  who  occupies  a  situation  in  one  of  the  de- 
partments of  government  at  Cape  Francois,  makes  this  reflec- 
tion with  much  feeling. — "Hence,"  he  observes,  "arises  a  most 
melancholy  consideration  for  humanity.  We  know  that  our  dis- 


eORONATION    OF    CHRISTOPIIE.  211 

sentions  give  joy  to  the  friends  of  slavery  ;  that  our  common  ty- 
rants calculate  upon  nothing  less  than  a  total  annihilation  of  the 
population  of  Hayti,  which  they  wish  to  be  able  to  replace  with 
a  new  race  of  wretches  transported  from  the  regions  of  Africa. 
We  know  the  whole  depth  of  their  villainy,  and  we  discover  an 
emulous  eagernpss^o  assist  them  effectually  by  destroying  each 
other.  O  delirium  of  the  passions!  O  inconceivable  fatality! 
To  what  lengths  do  ye  not  cany  men  who  listen  to  the  decep- 
tive illusions  of  ambition  !" 

In  fonsequence,  probably,  of  these  sentiments,  entertained  by 
both  parties,  hostilities  were  at  length  suspended,  as  if  by  mu- 
tual consent.  No  battle  has  been  fought,  nor  has  any  hostile 
movement  taken  place,  for  more  than  six  years  ;  so  that,  though 
there  has  been  no  treaty  of  peace,  or  forujal  armistice  conclu- 
ded, yet  perfect  tranquillity  has  prevailed  throughout  ti^  island. 

A  period  of  public  tranquillity  furnishes  not  many  incidents 
for  the  p<'n  of  the  hibtorian,  and  the  records  of  a  series  of  peace- 
ful years  are  often  comprised  in  a  few  pages.  The  island  of  St. 
Domingo,  from  the  year  1811,  exhibits  the  pleasing  spectacle 
of  a  people  n)aking  the  most  rapid  advances  in  the  career  of 
civilization  and  general  improvtment.  Both  Christophe  and 
Petion  appf-ar  to  have  applied  themselves  with  great  assiduity 
to  the  encouragement  of  industry  and  good  morals,  and  the  in- 
crease of  knuwl^dge  in  their  respective  territories,  and  to  the 
preparation  of  adequate  means  of  defence  against  any  attempts 
that  should  be  made  on  their  liberty  and  independence. 

Immediately  after  the  act  of  the  council  of  state,  in  March, 
181 1,  Ciristophe  assuuied  the  title  of  king,  and  surrounded  him- 
self with  all  the  usual  appendages  of  royalty.  On  Sunday,  the 
2d  of  June  following,  Henry  and  his  wife  were  crowned,  with 
great  pomp,  in  the  Champ  de  Mars,  at  Cape  Francois,  now 
called  Cape  Henry.  After  the  ceremony  of  consecration,  the 
king  and  queen,  and  some  of  the  great  officers  of  state,  received 
f\  the  sacrament  from  the  hands  of  the  archbishop ;  and  the  day- 
was  closed  with  an  entertainment  of  uncommon  splendour. 

The  various  institutions  of  this  new  kingdom  were  copied 
from  the  monarchies  of  Europe,  and  particularly  from  France  ; 


212  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

— -they  had  their  princes  of  the  blood,  their  duke^  and  counts,  ba- 
rons and  chevaliers  ;  their  grand  marshal,  grand  almoner,  and 
master  of  the  ceremonies  ;  their  levee  days  and  drawing-rooms  ; 
their  royal  birth  days,  coronation  day,  and  other  national  festivi- 
ties; their  ro)^al  palaces,  chamberlains,  pages,  and  body  guards; 
their  royal  and  military  order  of  St.  Henry  ;  their  chancery, 
and  other  courts;  llieir  notaries,  solicitors,  barristers,  and 
judges  ;  their  intendants,  surveyors,  and  directors  of  different 
departments;  their  royal  academy  and  theatre  royal:*— and 
some  of  their  arrangements  were  announced  to  the  world  in  a 
style  which  exhibited  a  mixture  of  oriental  inflation  and  French 
gasconade.  But  this  will  excite  no  surprise,  when  it  is  remem- 
bered from  what  a  condition  the  people  had  emerged,  what 
complete  success  had  crowned  their  struggle  for  independence, 
and  the  example  afforded  therii  in  the  proceedings  and  language 
of  the  imperial  cabinet  of  Paris.  But  no  impartial  observer 
could  withhold  his  admiration  from  the  hit^h  state  of  order  and 
cixilization  which  j)revailed  in  the  dominions  of  Christophe. 

The  organization  of  the  districts  under  the  government  of 
Petion,  though  differently  and  more  modestly  constructed,  was 
not  less  complete.  JVo  titles  of  nobility  were  adopted  by  him  ; 
but  there  were  son)e  gradations  of  military  rank,  the  same  distri- 
bution of  administrative  offices,  the  same  care  in  keeping  up, 
and  disciplining  a  military  force,  and  the  same  solicitude  on  the 
grand  subject  of  public  instruction. 

The  full  occupation  which  Bonaparte  found  for  his  armies  in 
Eurt)pe,  and  the  exclusion  of  his  squadrons  from  the  sea  by  the 
naval  power  of  Britain,  preserved  the  island  of  St.  Domingo 
from  any  further  armoyance  on  the  part  of  imperial  France. 
But  no  sooner  had  Bonaparte  ceased  to  reign,  and  Louis  the 
Eighteenth  ascended  the  throne  of  his  fathers,  than  the  ex-colo- 
nists renewed  their  attempts  for  the  recovery  of  their  lost  pos- 
sessions. With  thi>^  view,  ti)ey  presented  a  petition  to  the  cham- 
ber of  deputies,  calling  its  attention  to  the  state  of  the  island. 
The  petition  was  referred  toa  committee;  and  the  chairman, 
General  Desfourneaux,  who  had  formerly  served  in  the  colony, 

*  See  Appendix  VL 


PROJECTS    OF    THE    EX-COLONISTS.  213 

soon  reported  the  result  of  their  deliberations.  He  began  with  a 
most  unfair  and  exaggerated  statement  of  the  commercial  advanta- 
ges which  had  accrued  to  France  from  the  possession  of  St.  Do- 
mingo, which  were  displayed  in  a  manner  adapted  to  excite  the 
cupidity  of  all  classes  of  the  community.  He  next  proceeded  to 
examine  the  means  of  re-establishing  the  colony.  No  authentic 
information,  he  observed  had  yet  been  obtained  by  government 
respecting  the  dispositions  of  the  chiefs  who  divided  this  colony 
between  them  ;  but  from  his  own  knowledge  of  both  Christophe 
and  Petion,  he  fully  believed  that  they  would  be  eager  to 
acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  the  king.  And  in  that  case,  it 
was  proposed  that  the  king  should  be  entreated  to  grant  to  them 
and  to  various  other  black  chiefs  named  in  the  "report,  all  the 
marks  of  honour,  and  all  the  pecuniary  advantages  befitting  their 
situation  and  that  of  the  coli)ny  ; — but  that,  as  this  hope,  how- 
ever, might  by  possibility  be  disappointed,  his  majesty  should 
be  advised  to  send  a  sufficient  number  of  land  and  sea  forces  to 
occupy  the  colony,  and  hoist  there  the  white  flag  a^?  the  signal 
of  a  general  amnesty.  Taught  by  the  experience  of  past  fail- 
ures, it  was  argued,  such  an  expedition  c(tuld  not  now  but  be 
crowned  with  success.  And  even  if  the  mo«t  tranquiliizinsr  as- 
surances should  be  received  respecting  the  intentions  of  the 
chiefs,  it  was  observed,  it  would  be  necessary  to  transport  thi- 
ther, along  with  the  colonists,  a  sufficient  force  to  put  tfiem  in 
possession  of  their  estates,  and  to  secure  them  in  it.  The  re- 
porter proposed  to  the  chamber,  to  pray  his  majesty  to  present 
to  them  laws  for  the  interior  regulation  of  St.  Domingo,  as  well 
with  a  view  to  the  blacks  already  there,  as  to  those  loho  should 
herenfter  be  introduced ;  for  fixing  the  civil  and  political  rights  of 
mf n  of  all  colours,  possessed  of  property  in  the  colony;  and 
for  other  objects  of  a  pecuniary  and  commercial  nature.  The 
reporter  strongly  advised  immediate  celerity  in  fitting  out  the 
proposed  expedition,  to  which  he  confidently  promised  the 
most  successful  issue. 

Nor  were  these  sentiments  confined  to  the  ex-colonists  and 
their  immediate  connexions.  The  re-possession  and  re- culti- 
vation of  this  island  appear  to  have  been  favourite  objects  with 


214  HISTORY    OF    ST.   DOMINGO, 

a  considerable  number  of  tbe  leading  men  of  the  nation  ;  and, 
in  the  hope  of  effecting  them,  the  French  cabinet,  though  plac- 
ed in  circumstances  which  prevented  the  total  rejection  of  tlie 
proposal  of  Great  Britain  for  an  abandonment  of  the  Afiican 
slave  trade,  yet  refused  an  immediate  relinquishment  of  that 
abominable  traffic,  and  stipulated  fur  its  continuance  for  five 
years,  promising,  by  treaty,  its  definitive  cessation  at  the  end  of 
that  period.  Five  years  they  thought  would  be  sufficient  to 
supply  the  plantations  of  St.  Domingo  with  as  many  cargoes  of 
slaves  as  should  be  wanted  in  addition  to  the  myriads  of  ne- 
groes and  mulattoes  who  were  again  to  be  brought  under  the 
yoke. 

But  if  the  experience  of  the  world  did  not  exhibit  numerous 
instances  of  persons  entertaining  the  most  chimerical  hopes  of 
accomplishing  whatever  happens  to  be  the  object  of  their  ardent 
wishes,  it  could  scarcely  be  credited  that  men  of  understandings 
not  below  mediocrity  should  have  amused  themselves  with  the 

absurd   expectation, that  the  chiefs  of  St.  Domingo  would 

eagerly  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  France,  and  submit 
themselves  to  its  government ;  that  the  Intelligent,  wealthy,  and 
valiant  population  of  the  island  (the  swords  still  in  their  hands 
with  which  they  asserted  their  independence  in  the  hearts'  blood 
of  one  of  the  most  numerous  and  best  appointed  armies  that 
ever  crossed  the  Atlantic,)  would  permit  a  French  force  to  pre- 
scribe to  them  the  hours  and  conditions  of  labour,  and  to  rein- 
state the  planters,  with  their  cart- whips,  in  their  former  pleni- 
tude of  abused  power;  that  they  would  relinquish,  at  the  bid- 
ding of  Gallic  intruders,  properties  at  least  as  fairly  acquired  as 
those  bought  in  France  at  the  national  sales,  and  confirmed  to 
the  purchasers  by  the  new  constitution  ; — that  they  would  ex- 
change the  ease,  the  comforts,  the  luxuries  of  their  new  situa- 
tion,—  the  pride,  and  pomp,  and  circumstance  of  their  military 
array, — for  the  tender  mercies,  already  too  well  known,  of 
French  planters,  attorneys,   managers,  overseers,  and  drivers! 

If  any  disinterested  observer  could  have  questioned  the  absur- 
dity of  these  expectations,  it  must  soon  have  been  placed  beyond 
all  doubt  by  ihe  first  communications  both  from  Cape  Henry  and 
from  Port-au-Prince. 


FEELINGS   OF    THE    HAYTIANS.  216 

In  a  dispatch,  addressed  to  M.  Peltier,  London,  and  dated 
June  tlie  lOlh,  the  Cointe  de  lamonade,  secretary  for  foreign 
affairs  to  Christophe, — after  giving  an  account  of  the  satisfaction 
of  Dis  sovereign  at  hearing  of  the  fall  of  Bonaparte,  and  men- 
tioning the  preparations  he  had  long  been  making  for  the  de- 
fence of  his  kingdom,  preparations  \vhi(  h  the  expectation  of  a 
peace  between  the  powers  of  Europe  had  lately  induced  him 
to  increase  ; — proceeded  to  declare,  that  the  vessels  of  French 
merchants  were  at  liberty  to  enter  the  Haytian  ports  upon  the 
same  fooling  as  those  of  other  nations ;  and  expressed  the  wish 
of  his  sovereign  for  a  good  understanding  with  the  new  sove- 
reign of  France,  at  the  same  time  distinctly  stating,  that  the 
king  of  Hayti  would  treat  with  France  only  as  one  independent 
power  with  another/ 

The  sentiments  and  feelings  entertained  in  the  south  part  of 
the  island,  were  not  less  unequivocal  than  in  the  north.  It  was 
officially  notified  by  the  government,  that  on  the  first  appear- 
ance of  a  hostile  force,  fire  would  be  communicaled  to  all  the 
buildings  in  the  cities,  and  every  thing  destroyed  that  could  not 
be  removed  to  the  mountains.  The  arsenals  were  filled  with 
torches  ready  to  be  lighted.  If  a  suggestion  was  whispered  at 
the  government-house,  calling  in  question  the  policy  of  such  a 
measure,  the  doubt  was  immediately  silenced  by  a  referenre  to 
Moscow,  the  dfbtruclion  of  which  had  saved  Russia,  and  even 
Europe,  from  the  power  of  France. | 

As  soon  as  the  designs  of  the  French  government  were  known 
in  St.  Domingo,  there  was  published,  in  the  royal  gazette  of 
Hayti,  an  address  to  the  people,  explaining  to  them  the  new 
political  relations  in  which  they  were  placed  by  the  peace  be- 
tween France  and  the  other  powers  of  Europe.  After  express- 
ing the  joy  which  the  blacks  could  not  but  feel  at  the  downfall 
of  Bonaparte,  who  had  endeavoured  to  exterminate  them,  or  to 
subject  them  again  to  the  yoke  of  bondage,  and  with  whom 
they  had  determined  never  to  enter  into  any  amicable  engage- 
ments, this  paper  intimated  that  there  existed  not  the  same  rea- 

»  See  Appendix  VII  f  Set  Appendix  VIII, 


216  HISTORY    OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

sons  for  rejecting  peaceful  overtures  from  the  new  monarch  of 
France,  but  that,  in  the  event  of  his  waanifesting  a  friendly  dis- 
position, it  would  be  advisable  to  forna  with  him  a  treaty  of  ami- 
ty and  commerce,  compatable  with  the  honour,  liberty,  security, 
and  independence  of  Hayti.  It  proceeded  to  call  upon  the 
Haytians  to  make  ever}'  exertion  in  defence  of  their  liberty 
against  any  who  should  attempt  to  enslave  them  ;  and  in  the 
following  energetic  language,  bade  defiance  to  their  foes  : — "  If 
we  desire  the  benefits  and  enjoyments  of  peace,  we  fear  neither 
the  fatigues  nor  the  horrors  of  war.  Let  our  implacable  ene- 
mies, the  planters,  who  have  not  ceased,  for  twenty-five  years, 
to  indulge  the  extravagant  diearn  of  slavery,  and  to  pester  each 
succeeding  government  with  their  memoirs,  and  projects  of 
conquest  and  subjugation,  exciting  only  pity,  disgust,  or  abhor- 
rence for  their  ciiminal  and  wretched  authors  ; — let  these  tra- 
ders in  human  flesh,  these  vile  and  perfidious  plotters,  come  to 
execute  their  grand  schemes  of  servitude  and  destruction.  Let 
them  place  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  columns  to  direct  their 
march  ; — they  will  be  the  first  victinis  of  our  vengeance,  and  the 
land  of  liberty  will  rejoice  in  being  watered  with  the  blood  of  ^ 
its  oppressors.  Then  will,  indeed,  be  waged  a  war  of  extermi- 
nation :  no  quarter  will  be  -given,  no  prisoner  made.  Then 
shall  we  prove  to  the  world  what  a  nation  of  warriors,  armed  in 
the  most  just  of  causes,  can  effect  in  the  defence  of  our  homes, 
our  wives,  our  children,  our  liberty,  our  independence."  Then 
followed  a  number  of  directions  as  to  the  mode  of  warfare  pro- 
per to  be  pursued  in  case  of  invasion  ;  and  the  paper  concluded 
thus  : — "  It  is  in  vain  that  our  tyrants  conceive  the  mad  hope  of 
sowing  disunion  among  us.  Their  appearance  will  be  the  signal 
for  our  union.  Who  can  now  deceive  us  as  to  our  true  inter 
ests  ?  Who  is  there  among  us  that  would  now  allow  himself  to 
be  seduced  by  the  treacherous  and  deceitful  promises  of  &n  ene- 
my whom  we  know  too  well  f  Who  is  the  weak  wretch  that 
would  even  think  of  prolonging  his  days,  in  order  to  be  burnt 
alive,  drowned,  or  hanged,  six  months  after?  No  :  if  we  must 
have  war,  we  muit  either  be  all  exterminated,  or  live  free  and 
independent." 


< 


FRENCH    COMMISSIONERS.  217 

This  address  appeared  on  the  15th  of  August,  and  on  the  1 8th 
«f  September  was  published  a  manifesto  of  King  Henry,  giving 
a  detailed  narrative  of  the  events  which  had  produced  and  ac- 
companied the  independence  of  Hayti  ;  justifying,  before  the 
tribunal  of  nations,  the  legitimacy  of  that  independence ;  and 
expressing  a  firm  resolution  to  maintain  it.  It  is  no  exaggerat- 
ed applause,  to  say  that  this  manifesto,  in  eloquence  and  argu- 
ment, will  bear  a  comparison  with  the  most  celebrated  state 
papers  of  the  most  eloquent  and  enlightened  nations  of  the 
world.  The  length  of  its  historical  details,  referring  to  events 
narrated  in  the  preceding  pages  of  this  history,  prevents  its  inser- 
tion here  ;  but  the  reader  will  find  it  among  the  papers  in  the 
appendix.  It  concluded  with  the  solemn  declaration  that  Henrv 
would  never  consent  to  any  treaty,  or  any  condition,  that  should 
compromise  the  honour,  the  liberty,  and  the  independence  of 
the  Haytian  people.* 

In  the  month  of  June,  1814,  Malouet,  the  minister  of  the 
colonies  to  Louis  the  Eighteenth,  sent  to  the  West  Indies  three 
commissioners,  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  obtaining  and  trans- 
mitting to  the  French  government,  information  respecting  the 
state  of  St.  Domingo,  and  the  disposition  of  its  chiefs  The 
selection  of  agents  for  this  business,  betrayed  the  same  folly 
which  characterised  the  whole  of  the  scheme.  Their  names 
were  Dauxion  Lavaysse,  De  Medina,  and  Draverman.  The 
first  had  been  a  member  of  the  committee  of  public  safety,  at 
Paris,  under  the  infamous  Robespierre ;  the  second  had  served 
in  St.  Domingo,  in  the  army  of  Toussaint,  and  being  entrusted 
with  an  important  post,  had  betrayed  it  to  the  Fiench  under  Le 
Clerc.  Agreeably  to  their  instructions  to  repair  without  delay  to 
Porto  Rico  or  Jamaica,  these  emissaries  proceeded  to  England, 
and  sailed  from  Falmouth  in  a  packet  for  Jamaica,  where  they 
arrived  in  the  latter  end  of  the  mouth  of  August. 

On  the  6th  of  September,  at  Kingston,  in  that  island,  Lavaysse, 
the  chief  of  the  mission,  commenced  his  proceedings  with  a 
letter  to  Petion  ;  in  which  he  endeavoured  to  allure  him,  in  a 

*  See  Appendix  IX. 
99 


218  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

manner,  however,  but  ill  adapted  to  the  end  he  had  in  view,  t© 
acknowledge  the  authority  of  Louis  the  Eighteenth. 

On  the  1st  of  October,  Lavaysse  ad(iressed  a  letter  to  Cbris- 
tophe,  containing  a  strange  mixture  of  stupid  flattery,  and  still 
more  stupid  intimidation.  He  urged  the  black  chief,  by  vaiious 
arguments  and  persuasives,  to  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of 
France,  and  threatened  him  with  the  combined  force  of  Europe 
if  he  should  refuse  to  proclaim  Louis  the  Eighteenth.  A  com- 
pact, he  stated,  had  been  signed  by  all  the  Euiopean  sovereigns, 
and  Great  Bi  itain.  he  aflirmed,  vras  the  soul  of  the  confederacy, 
to  destroy  all  the  governments  which  had  arisen  out  of  the 
French  revolution,  and  among  the  rest  that  (>f  Hayti,  if  Chris- 
tophe  should  be  so  blind  to  bis  true  interests  as  not  to  yield  to 
the  invitations-  of  the  restored  monarch.  The  slaves  which 
France  wps  at  that  moment  purchasing  on  the  coast  of  Africa, 
he  added,  would  be  converted  into  soldiers  for  the  purpose  of 
destroying  the  refractory.  He,  at  the  same  lime,  intimated  his 
persuasion,  that  Christophe  was  too  wise  not  to  prefer  becom- 
ing an  illustrious  servant  of  the  great  sovereign  of  France,  to 
continuing  in  the  precarious  situatioti  of  a  chief  of  revolted 
slaves.  The  letter  was  filled  with  the  grossest  nris-statements 
of  fact,  in  reference  to  the  events  which  bad  recently  taken 
place  in  Europe,  and  abundantly  proved  the  entire  ignorance  of 
the  writer,  and  of  the  minister  under  whose  instructions  he  was 
acting,  as  to  the  state  of  information  in  Hayti ;  where  every  oc- 
currence that  passes  in  Europe,  was  as  fully  known  as  on  the 
Exchange  in  London. 

On  receiving  this  letter,  which  Lavaysse  had  accompanied 
with  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  Petion,  King  Henry,  with  true  mag- 
nanimity, convoked  an  extraordinary  council  of  the  nation,  and 
laid  before  them  these  documents,  desiring  them  calmly  to  de- 
liberate on  their  contents,  and  form  such  resolutions  as  they 
should  deem  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the  counlr}'.  This 
confidence  of  the  king  was  le^aid  by  a  unanimous  address 
from  the  council,  expressed  in  the  warmest  terms  of  patriotic 
energy. 

"  The  most  abominable  of  tyrants,"  they  said,  "  when  they 


FRENCH    COMMISSIONERS.  219 

have  wished  to  iiDpose  their  oppressive  yoke  on  the  people, 
have  emplo)ed  treacljery,  and  have  covered  their  cri'i)iiial  pur- 
poses under  some  specious  pretexts  ;  but  ihe  envoy  of  the  king 
of  the  French  has  impudently  dispensed  with  all  disguise.  He 
has  dared  to  propose  to  a  free  p>'opIe  the  ahernative  of  slavery 
or  death.  And  to  whom  do  they  dare  thus  to  speak  of  master 
and  slave  ?  To  us,  a  people  free  and  independent ;  to  warriors 
covered  with  noble  wounds  gained  in  the  field  of  honour;  who 
have  destroyed  to  their  very  roots,  ancient  prejudices  and  slave- 
ry :  tu  those  warriors,  who,  in  a  thousand  combats,  have  made 
so  many  of  those  barbarous  colonists  bite  the  dust ;  the  residue 
of  whom,  escaped  frotn  our  vengeance,  now  dare  to  speak  to  us 
of  restoring  iheir  abhorred  system,  which  we  have  proscribed 
for  ever. — The  conduct  pursued  by  the  French,  shows  that  they 
place  us  beyond  the  pale  of  nations  :  for  to  what  other  people  on 
earth  would  they  dare  to  propose  conditions  so  vile  and  degrad- 
ing ?  They  contemn  us  ;  they  are  so  impressed  with  the  notion 
of  our  stupidity,  as  to  suppose  that  we  want  the  ordinary  in- 
stinct which  impels  animals  to  seek  their  own  preservation.  Is 
it  in  return  for  the  benefits  we  have  received  from  the  French, 
that  we  are  now  to  resume  the  chains  of  slavery  f  Is  it  for  a 
sovereign  who  is  wholly  unknown  to  us,  who  has  never  done  any 
thing  for  us.  and  in  whose  name  we  are  insulted,  that  we  should 
now  change  our  slate  ?  Is  it  to  be  delivered  anew  to  torture, 
or  to  be  devoured  by  dogs,  that  we  are  to  renounce  the  fruit  of 
twenty-five  years  of  battle  and  blood  ^  What  have  we  still  in 
comrnon  with  this  people.  We  have  broken  every  tie  that 
bound  us  to  them.  We  have  now  no  points  of  union  with  the 
French,  who  have  never  ceased  to  persecute  us,  and  whom  we 
abhor.'*  Why  then  must  we  be  condemned  to  groan  under  their 
oppressive  yoke  .'*"  If  it  were  a  question,  they  observe,  whether 
they  should  prefer  slavery  or  extermination,  they  would  unani- 
mously embrace  the  latter  alternative.  But  no,  they  say,  that  is 
impossible  ;  "  Hayti  will  be  invincible.  The  justice  of  her 
cause  will  enable  her  to  triumph  over  all  obstacles."  They 
conclude  with  offering  their  arms,  their  property,  and  their  lives, 
to  the  service  of  their  king,  their  country,  their  liberty,  their  in- 
dependence. 


220  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOMINGO. 

The  misrepresentations  and  falsehoods  ofLavaysse,  especially 
'  in  reference  to  the  pretended  confederacy  among  the  powers  of 
Europe,  and  the  interest  taken  by  Great  Britain  in  the  alleged 
object  of  that  alliance,  was  triumphantly  refuted  by  the  Cheva- 
lier Prezeau,  secretary  to  Chiistophe  ;  whose  answer  to  La- 
vaysse's  letter  manifests  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  parti- 
cular questions  at  issue,  as  well  as  much  general  infornjation, 
and  considerable  acuteness  of  intellect.  I  perceive,"  says  Pre- 
zeau, "  in  the  course  of  your  letter,  that  one  of  your  great 
objects,  is  to  generate  distrust  between  us  and  the  brave  and 
loyal  British  nation,  by  threatening  us  with  the  co-operation  of 
her  arms  against  us.  But  could  you  for  one  moment  persuade 
yourself  that  we  should  be  the  dupes  of  your  perfidy  and  falsehood ; 
when  in  the  public  prints  we  witness  all  the  efforts  which  the 
English  government  and  the  virtuous  philanthropists  of  that  na- 
tion have  been  making  in  our  favour  ?  I  can,  moreover,  assure 
you,  that  we  have  various  extra-official  documents,  which  prove 
to  us,  that  the  views  of  the  powers  of  Europe  towards  us,  are 
very  remote  indeed  from  those  which  you  would  assign  to  them. 
Far  from  having  gained  ground,  see  what  you  have  in  effect  done. 
You  have  thrown  light  on  our  course.  You  have  given  us  new 
motives  for  attaching  ourselves  to  the  great  British  nation  ;  and 
new  grounds  of  execration  against  you,  and  distrust  of  your  cri- 
minal, schenies." 

Colont-1  De  Medina  was  sent  by  Lavaysse  to  Cape  Henry  to 
conduct  the  negociation  with  Christophe.  There  he  was  re- 
cognized as  a  native  of  St.  Domingo,  an  ex-officer  of  the  army, 
and  a  traitor  to  the  cause  : — on  this  account,  and  because  he 
was  without  any  credentials  from  the  French  government,  he 
was  arrested,  and  his  papers  seized.  From  these  papers  it  ap- 
peared, that  the  real  object  of  his  mission,  which  he  pretended 
to  be  wholly  pacific,  was  to  excite  discord  and  insurrection 
among  the  Haytians.  He  was,  therefore,  brought  before  a  spe- 
cial niilitaiy  commission,  and  tried  as  a  spy.  If  any  doubts 
could  have  been  entertained  at  Cape  Henry  of  the  ulterior 
designs  of  the  French  government,  the  papers  found  upon  this 
man,  and  the  answers  given  by  bim  to  the  interrogatories  put  by 


NEGOCIATION    WITH    PETION.  221 

the  president  of  the  court,  would  have  been  sufficient  to  con- 
vince the  inhabitants  of  St.  Domingo,  that  they  had  no  more 
favour  or  friendship  to  expect  from  the  cabinet  of  Louis  than 
from  that  of  Bonaparte. 

It  has  already  been  stated,  that  on  the  6th  of  September, 
Lavaysse  addressed  a  letter  to  Petion.  Thi^  letter  was  quite 
vague  and  indistinct  in  its  proposals.  On  the  24th  of  the  same 
month,  the  president  sent  a  complimentary  answer ;  inviting 
Lavaysse  to  Port-au-Prince.  Lavaysse  accordingly  embraced 
the  first  opportunity,  and  sailed  for  Port-au-Prince,  in  an  Eng- 
lish vessel.  On  his  arrival,  he  addressed  the  president  in  a 
second  letter,  in  which,  after  attributing  all  the  sufferings  of  the 
Haytians  to  "  the  men  who  were  a  disgrace  to  the  French  name, 
the  enemies  of  the  house  of  Bourbon,  the  disciples  of  Robes- 
pierre, Marat,  and  Carrier,  and  the  worthy  sattellites  of  their 
successor,  the  Corsican  tyrant :" — he  formally  proposed, — 

1.  "  That  the  president  should  recognize  and  proclaim  the 
sovereignty  of  the  French  king. 

2.  "  That  the  president  and  other  leading  men,  in  imitation 
of  what  had  been  done  in  France,  at  the  epoch  of  Bonaparte's 
deposition,  should  form  themselves  into  a  provisional  govern- 
ment; subject  to  the  authority  of  Louis  the  Eighteenth. 

3.  "  That  they  should  hoist  the  French  flag." 

In  the  event  of  a  compliance  with  these  terms,  he,  in  return, 
promised  the  president  and  his  colleagues  honourable  distinc- 
tion and  rewards :  and  he  assured  them  that  the  progress  of 
knowledge,  in  France,  had  destroyed  the  tyranny  of  hurtful  pre- 
judices; and  that  Louis,  "like  the  Divinity  of  whom  he  was 
the  representative,"  felt  equal  affection  for  bis  subjf^cts,  with- 
out distinction  of  colour.  In  this  letter,  Lavaysse  again  took 
occasion  to  inveigh  with  fury  against  the  "  Corsican  ;"  as  well 
as  against  the  "  Bashaw  Le  Clerc,"  and  "the  other  brigands 
who  w*- re  sent  to  Hayti,  in  1S02,  by  the  usurper;" — amongst 
whom,  it  may  be  observed,  was  General  Desfourneaux,  who 
lately  hoped,  by  bis  falsehoods  and  sophistry,  to  prevail  on  the 


222  HISTORY    OF    ST.    DOiMINGO. 

French  government  to  send  him  out  on  a  similar  expedition. 
The  president  replied  by  an  enumeration  of  the  evils  which 
Hayti  had  suffered  from  revolutionary  France.  He  reminded 
Lavaysse,  that  the  national  cockade  was  the  first  incitement  to 
massacre  in  St.  Domingo ;  that  many  of  the  colonists,  now  so 
clamorous  at  the  court  of  the  Bourbon?,  but  lately,  for  the  most 
part,  sattellites  of  B(maparte,  were,  in  the  first  peiiod  of  the 
revolution,  violent  democrats,  as  was  fully  proved  by  the  la- 
mented assassination  of  Colonel  Mauduit,  a  particular  friend 
and  confidant  of  Monsieur.  Petion  concluded  by  stating  that 
he  had  convoked  the  chief  authorities  of  the  republic,  and 
would  lay  before  them  the  propositions  made  by  Lavaysse. 

On  the  2lst  of  Novenilaer,  the  geneial  assembly  of  the  Hay- 
tian  authorities  was  held  at  Port  au-Prince  ;  and  unanimously 
resolved  on  rejecting  the  French  proposals.  This  resolution 
was  formally  communicated  to  Lavaysse,  by  the  president,  with 
a  statement  of  the  reasons  on  which  it  was  founded  :  but  it  was 
added,  that,  wishing  to  re-establish  commercial  relations  with 
France,  and  to  manifest  the  respect  which  they  had  always  felt 
for  bis  majesty,  Louis  the  Eighteenth,  the  Haytian  republic  was 
willing  to  fix  the  basis  of  a  pecuniary  indemnity  for  the  losses 
which  the  French  colonists  had  sustained,  and  must  continue  to 
suffer,  in  consequence  of  the  separation  of  Hayti  from  France. 

To  this  very  liberal  offtr  Lavaysse  was  not  authorized  to  give 
any  answer.  He,  accordingly,  on  the  29th  of  November,  with 
many  acknowledgments  for  the  civilities  he  had  received,  per- 
sonally demanded  his  passports;  and  soon  afterwards  left  the 
island  in  a  vessel  which  he  had  hired  for  that  purpose. 

All  the  official  documents  relative  to  this  transaction  were 
printed  and  published  at  Port-au-Prince,  preceded  by  the  fol- 
lowing dignified  and  eloquent  address,  fiom  the  president 

"To  THE  People  and  Army. 

"  Never  throughout  the  annals  of  the  republic,  did  a  more  in- 
teresting epoch  present  itself,  than  that  which  you  are  ncrw 
called  to  witness  :  never  was  there  one  which  demanded  that 


PROCLAMATION    OF    PETION.  223 

the  national  character  should  exert  itself  with  greater  magna- 
nimity. 

"  Haytians !  during  four  and  twenty  years,  we  have  fought 
for  our  rights,  for  our  libetty.  Our  independence  is  the  fruit  of 
our  labours.  Without  this,  there  can  be  no  warrant,  no  security 
for  the  continuance  of  our  present  constitution  Already  cele- 
brated for  our  u)ilitary  character,  and  our  honourable  qualities, 
every  eye  is  fixed  upon  us,  waiting  the  result  of  our  conduct. 
It  will  be  an  example  to  posterity.  1  will  not  revert  to  any 
of  the  glorious  traits  by  which  those  men  were  distinguished, 
who  immortalized  themselves  in  former  contests  for  freedom. 
History  has  not  forgotten  them.  By  her  will  their  remem- 
brance be  perpetuated. 

"  1  address  myself  to  those  men  vrhose  hearts  glow  with  the 
purest  patriotism,  to  a  people  free  in  fact  and  in  right,  and  who 
will  not  fail  to  demonstrate  to  the  universe  that  they  are  worthy 
of  being  so.  Generosity  and  greatness  of  soul  constitute  the 
very  elements  of  the  patriot's  character.  In  you  I  have  ever 
observed  these  noble  qualities;  and  lately  1  have  received  an 
additional  proof  of  them;  for  which  I  must  do  myself  the  hon- 
our of  offering  to  you  the  liveliest  expressions  of  my  heartfelt 
graticude. 

"  France,  having  concluded  a  treaty  of  peace,  renews  her 
claim  to  St.  Dunnngo  Though  she  has  for  ever  forfeited  all 
her  pretensions  to  Hayti,  and  though  this  loss  is  owing  to  the 
French  themselves,  she  determines  nevertheless  to  revive  them  ; 
and  for  this  purpose  has  chosen  rather  to  make  use  of  methods 
of  conciliation,  than  to  employ  (hose  arms  which  will  always 
prove  impotent.  The  French  general,  Dduxion  Lavaysse,  was 
sent  hither  as  her  agent.  You  received  and  welcomed  him ; 
performed  the  sacred  rites  of  hospitality;  and  admitted  him 
amongst  you  with  confidence.  He  spoke  to  you  in  the  language 
of  his  mission ;  and,  at  the  distance  of  a  thousand  leagues  from 
his  country,  was  not  deterred,  by  any  consideration,  from  urging 
with  vehemence  the  pretensions  of  his  government,  lour 
chiefs  and  magistrates  were  assembled  in  consultation.  They 
listened  calmiy  to  the  proposals  of  France.     A  government 


224  HISTORY   OF    ST.  DOMINGO. 

firmly  established  on  the  solid  basis  of  reason  and  justice,  is 
capable,  not  only  of  hearing  every  thing  with  calmness,  but  of 
judging  of  every  thing  with  discrimination.  The  propositions 
of  the  French  government  being  incompatible  with  your  princi- 
ples and  institutions,  were  unanimously  rejected.  This  will 
ever  be  the  fate  of  all  such  as  shall  tend  to  lead  your  steps  back- 
ward, in  the  career  you  have  so  gloriously  run.  Without 
shrinking  from  war,  you  were  willing,  however,  to  evince  your 
desire  of  peace;  and  to  avert  from  your  families  and  your 
children  the  calamities  which  follow  in  its  train,  by  offering  to 
submit  to  pecuniary  sacrifices,  in  order  to  silence  your  persecu- 
tors, whose  cries  and  complaints  importune  the  French  throne 
for  the  restitution  of  possessions,  which  they  would  be  afraid  to 
attack,  if  they  knew  that  at  their  approach  they  would  be  burnt 
to  ashes.  Your  chiefs,  the  depositaries  of  the  intentions  you 
had  previously  expressed,  especially  subsequently  to  the  conti- 
nental peace,  were  commissioned,  in  your  name,  to  make  this 
generous  proposal.  It  is  a  high  honour  to  you  ;  and  will  convey 
a  high  opinion  of  your  wisdom,  as  well  as  awaken  the  greatest 
dread  of  your  resentment. 

"  Haytians  !  you  have  done  what  you  ought  to  have  done. 
The  right  of  arms  has  given  you  possession  of  the  country.  It 
is  your  unalienable  property  :  and,  as  its  masters,  you  are  free  to 
make  what  use  you  please  of  that  which  belongs  to  you.  By 
mutual  agreement,  and  a  compact  from  which  they  never  devi- 
ate, nations  respect  the  rights  of  individuals.  The  character  of 
an  envoy  is  always  held  sacred,  even  though  his  intentions  are 
ever  so  crin)inal.  The  French  general,  Dauxion  Lavaysse,  is 
gone ;  having  executed  the  mission  with  which  he  was  entrusted. 
You  have  not  to  reproach  yourselves  with  having  been  wanting 
in  what  you  owe  tQ  yourselves.  You  have  not  violated  this 
fundamental  principle,  which  establishes  between  governments 
those  necessary  communications  which  are  required  by  their 
political  relations.  You  have  done  that  which  renders  you 
estimable  in  your  own  eyes :  you  deserve  to  appear  so  in  the 
eyes  of  other  nations.  Victory  ever  accompanies  the  cause  of 
justice.     Is  not  this  telling  you  that  it  is  yours  if  the  French 


PROCLAMATION    OF    PETION.  225 

venture  to  molest  you.  Should  this  be  the  event,  you  shall  see 
me  at  your  head,  proud  to  lead  you  on  to  victory  or  to  perish 
with  you. — Whatever  may  be  the  fate  which  heaven  has  reserv- 
ed for  us,  it  is  our  duty  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it.  Let  it  be 
the  care  of  those  chiefs  whose  paternal  authority  directs  you,  in 
the  districts  of  which  the  command  is  confided  to  them,  to  esta- 
blish secure  retreats  for  the  inhabitants  in  the  interior  of  our 
mountains.  For  this  purpose,  let  them  employ  the  workmen 
under  their  orders.  Let  them  also  muliiply  the  plantations  of 
every  sort  of  provisions.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  magistrates  and 
justices  of  the  peace,  to  promote  unanimity,  concord,  the  love 
of  labour,  and  mutual  confidence  among  their  fellow-citizens. 
The  republic  relies  on  every  man's  doing  his  duty.  I  hope  to 
set  you  an  example.  1  have  given  orders  that  the  documents 
shall  be  printed,  which  relate  to  our  communications  with  the 
French  government.  They  will  be  submitted  to  your  inspec- 
tion at  the  close  of  this  address.  You  will  see  what  it  is  that 
they  propose  to  you,  and  what  answer  it  becomes  you  to  return. 

«  Given  at  Port-au-Prince,  Dec.  3d,  1S14; 
"  1  Ith  year  of  independence. 

(Signed)  "  Petion." 

When  these  transactions  were  known  in  Paris,  the  king  of 
France  formally  and  officially  disclaimed  any  participation  in 
the  proceedings  of  Dauxion  Lavaysse,  whose  mission  was  de- 
clared to  have  been  directed  to  the  single  point  of  procuring 
information  to  guide  the  deliberations  of  the  French  govern- 
ment. The  tone  adopted  in  his  letters  to  the  Haytian  chiefs, 
therefore,  was  wholly  disavowed.  But  however  the  general 
character  of  the  French  monarch  may  have  given  credibility  to 
the  disavowal,  as  far  as  related  to  his  individual  conduct  in  this 
affair ;  the  well  known  character  of  Malouet,  the  minister  by 
whom  the  commissioners  were  sent,  left  little  room  to  doubt 
that  the  conduct  of  the  agents  had  been  conformable  to  the 
spirit,  at  least,  of  the  secret  instructions  received  from  their 
emplovers:  and  the  subsequent  disclosure  of  those  instructions 

30 


iJ26  HISTORY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

established  this  fact  beyond  all  contradiction.  It  was,  probably 
a  happy  circumstance  for  the  cause  of  Haytian  freedom,  that 
these  instructions  were  framed  with  such  entire  family  as  could 
not  but  conduce  to  the  confirmation,  if  any  thing  could  further 
confirm,  the  liberty  and  independence  of  Hayti. 

The  ex-colonists,  however,  were  too  much  enamoured  of  their 
golden  dreams  to  desist  from  further  efforts  to  convert  them  into 
realities.  What  it  was  found  impossible  to  accomplish  by  fraud, 
they  used  every  art  of  persuasion  to  induce  the  government  to 
attenipt  by  force.  Their  party  was  so  powerful  at  the  court  of 
Louis,  that  preparations  were  actually  made,  and  an  expedition 
was  intended  to  sail  in  the  spring  pf  1815,  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
ducing the  inhabitants  of  St.  Domingo  to  their  former  servitude, 
or  sweeping  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

But  the  month  of  March  was  distinguished  by  an  event  which 
no  human  sagacity  had  anticipated.  Bonaparte  returned  from 
Elba,  and  suddenly  seated  himself  again  on  the  throne  of  France. 
This  revolutirai  prevented  the  sailing  of  tlie  expedition,  and 
defeateil  the  projects  of  the  colonists.  Bonaparte  thought  it 
politic  to  issue  an  edict  for  the  abolition  of  the  slave  tiade,  and 
soon  after  sent  overtures  to  St  Domingo,  which  had  for  ihcir 
object  to  bring  back  the  island  to  the  condition  of  a  French 
colony;  but  his  propositions  were  immediately  rejected  with 
disdain.  During  the  short  period  that  passed  before  his  second 
fall,  he  was  too  much  occupied  with  European  warfare,  to  admit 
of  his  annoying  the  inhabitants  of  Hayti. 

As  soon  as  Louis  the  Eighteenth  was  replaced  upon  his 
throne,  the  ex-colonists  renewed  their  intrigues,  and  employed 
subaltern  and  ex-ofiicial  agents  to  make  further  overtures  to  the 
Haytians,  with  the  same  insidious  purpose  of  reducing  them 
again  under  the  po^er  of  France.  Many  months  elapsed  before 
the  government  could  find  time  for  attention  to  this  object  of  its 
ambition  and  cupidity.  But  in  July,  J  81 6,  the  king  of  France, 
on  the  report  of  the  secretary  of  state  fur  the  department  of  the 
marine  and  the  colonies,  issued  an  ordinance,  naming  and  ap- 
pointing several  commissioners  to  St.  Domingo  ;  who  were  to 
be  invested  with  the  administration  of  ail  the  affairs  of  the  island, 
both  civil  and  military. 


PROGRESS   OF    EDUCATION.  227 

These  commissioners,  who  were  all  ex-colonists,  and  men 
who  bad  become  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  negroes  and 
people  of  colour,  proceeded  towards  the  intended  scene  of  their 
mission ;  and  skulking  along  the  coast  in  an  American  vessel, 
sent  on  shore  letters  ad  Iressed  to  M  )nsieur  General  Christophe; 
a  superscription,  which  having  become  obsolete,  and  being 
deemed  injurious  and  insulting  to  the  existing  order  of  things 
in  Hayti,  caused  the  papers  to  be  Instantly  returned  unopened. 
They  then  resorted  to  the  expedient  of  enclosing  their  commu- 
nications in  an  envelope  addressed  to  the  commandant  of  the 
port  of  Gonaives.  These  papers  served  only  to  exciie  the  con- 
tempt of  the  Haytians,  to  enflame  them  with  increased  abhor- 
rence of  their  ft)rmer  oppressors,  to  produce  fresh  abjurations  of 
all  connection  with  France,  and  to  strengthen  their  resolutions 
to  maintain  their  liberty  and  independence. 

However  the  French  government  may  since  that  time  have 
sympathized  with  the  ex-colonists,  and  cast  many  a  longing, 
lingering  look  towards  this  fairest  and  most  important  of  ail 
their  former  West  Indian  possessions,  no  attempt  has  been 
made  for  its  re-conquest;  and  it  seems  probable  that  all  hope 
of  its  recovery,  in  any  manner,  has  ere  now  been  for  ever  re- 
linquished. 

Though  the  two  governments  which  rule  the  northern  and 
southern  districts,  have  not  established  any  relations  of  muiual 
amity,  they  have  remained  in  a  state  of  perfect  tranquillity,  and 
have  devoted  their  attention  to  the  cultivation  of  their  respective 
territories,  and  to  the  civilization  and  general  improvement  of  their 
people.  They  have  both  shown  the  most  laudable  solicitude  for 
the  instruction  of  the  rising  generation.  Christophe  has  examin- 
ed the  rival  claims  of  the  two  popular  systems  of  education  prac- 
tised in  England,  and  has  decided  in  favour  of  Lancaster's,  in 
preference  to  Dr.  Bell's.  Schools  have  been  established  at 
Cape  Henry,  Sans  Souci,  Port  Paix,  and  other  places.  They 
are  denominated  JSational  Lancaster ian  Schools.  In  mechanism, 
arrangement  of  the  rooms,  lessons,  and  every  other  particular, 
they  are  exactly  on  the  model  of  the  British  and  Foreign  School 
Society's  Central  School,  in  the  Borough-road,  London.    This 


228  HISTORY    OF    ST    DOMINGO. 

system  is  also  adopted  by  Petion,  who  has  established  a  school, 
under  a  master  sent  out  from  the  British  and  Foreign  School 
Society,  at  Port  au-Prince. 

In  the  schools  established  by  King  Henry,  both  the  French 
and  English  languages  are  taught — and  it  is  the  king's  declared 
intention  to  endeavour  to  bring  the  English  language  into 
general  use,  in  hopes  that  it  will  in  time  supercede  the  French 
as  the  vernacular  language  of  the  people  at  large. 

Henry  has  likewise  appropriated  a  considerable  fund  to  the 
erection  and  endowment  of  a  college,  in  which  professors  of 
every  branch  of  literature  and  science  are  to  be  established 
and  liberally  rewarded. 

From  the  zeal  manifested  by  both  chiefs  in  this  noble  cause, 
and  the  progress  already  made  in  carrying  their  wise  and  be- 
nevolent designs  into  effect,  there  is  great  reason  to  hope  that, 
in  a  few  years,  the  island  of  Hayti  will  exhibit  a  population  as 
generally  educated,  as  that  of  any  country  on  the  face  of  the 
globe. 


Av  Ti>Ti>Trt^i 


iH®i2 


<% 


APPENDIX. 


231 


APPENDIX  I. 

STATZSTICAZi  TABLES, 

RELATIVE  TO  THE  FRENCH  PART  OF  ST.  DOMINGO, 

No.  I. 
\eral  Statement  of  the  Productions  and  Manvfactures  of  the  French  Part  o/St.  Domingo,  in  the  year  1791. 

Drawn  up  by  order  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of  France. 


Quarters  or  Parishes. 
APPENDIX  11. 

Beside  the  epistolary  communications  to  Le  Clerc,  it  has  been  as- 
serted that  Toussaint  returned  an  answer  to  the  letter  addressed  to 
him  by  Bonaparte  :  and  some  time  after,  a  paper  was  circulated  pur- 
porting to  be  a  copy  of  it ;  which,  if  genuine,  reflects  no  less  credit  on  his 
heart  than  on  his  understanding;  while  it  may  serve,  in  some  degree, 
to  account  for  the  treacherous  conduct  which  he  afterwards  experien- 
ced. There  has  not  appeared,  however,  sufficient  external  evidence 
to  authorize  its  insertion  in  the  history;  but  compared  with  his  own 
letters,  of  the  genuineness  of  which  no  doubt  has  been  expressed,  the 
internal  evidence  in  its  favour  will  hardly  admit  of  its  being  wholly 
passed  over.     It  is  therefore  inserted  here. 

"  Citizen-Consul, 

"  Your  letter  has  been  transmitted  to  me  by  Citizen  Le  Clerc, 
your  brother-in-law,  whom  you  have  appointed  Captain- General  of 
this  Island,  a  title  not  n-cognized  by  the  constitution  of  St.  Domingo. 
The  same  messenger  has  restored  two  innocent  children  to  the  fond 
embraces  of  a  doating  father.  What  a  noble  instance  of  European 
humanity !  But  dear  as  these  pledges  are  to  me,  and  painful  as  our 
separation  is,  I  will  owe  no  obliiiations  to  my  enemies,  and  I  therefore 
return  them  to  the  custody  of  their  gaolers. 

"  The  forces  necessary  to  make  the  sovereignty  of  the  French 
people  respected,  have  efTected  a  landing  also,  and  they  are  spreading 
slaughter  and  devastation  around  them,  Why  is  it  thus?  For  what 
crimes,  and  by  what  authority,  are  a  rude,  but  inoffensive  people,  to 
be  consumed  by  fire  and  by  the  sword?  We  have  dared,  it  seems,  to 
form  a  constitution  adapted  to  our  circumstances;  containing,  as  you 
admit,  many  good  things,  but  containing  others,  forsooth,  derogatory 
from  the  sovereignty  of  the  French  people !  In  whom  does  it  residej 
and  how  far  does  it  extend  ?  Is  it  to  be  beyond  control,  without 
measure,  and  without  bounds  ? 


APPENDIX.  235 

*'  St.  Domlns;o,  a  colony  forming  an  integral  part  of  the  French 
republic,  aims  at  independence,  it  is  said.     Why  should  it  not?  The 
United  States  of  America  did  the  same;  and  with  the  assistance  of 
monarchical  France  they  succeeded  and  established  it.     But  there  are 
defects  as  well  as  presumption  in  our  constitution.     I  know  there  are. 
What  human  institution  is  without  them }  Yet  I  will  challenge  the 
system  you  have  imposed  upon  the  republic  you  govern,  to  shew  a 
greater  regard    to   personal  or  political  liberty,  to  the  freedom  of 
speech,  or  the  freedom  of  man.     The  high  situation  I  fill,  is  not  of  my 
own  choosing;  it  has  been  forced  upon  me  by  imperious  circumstan- 
ces.    I  have  not  overturned  a  constitution  I  had  sworn  to  maintain. 
I  saw  this  wretched  isle  a  prey  to  frantic  and  contending'  factions. 
My  character,  my  complexion,  gave  me  some  influence  with  the  peo- 
ple who  inhabit  it,  and  I  was  almost  by  their  unanimous  voice  called 
to  authority.     I  crushed  sedition ;  I  put  down  rebellion ;  I  restored 
tranquillity;  I  established  order  in  the  place  of  anarchy;   I  gave  them 
peace,  and  I  gave  them  a  constitution.     Have  you,  Citizen-Consul, 
another  or  a  better  title  to  the  commanding  situation  you  occupy  ?  If 
they  enjoy  not  under  it  as  great  a  portion  of  liberty  as  is  to  be  found 
under  othrr  governments,  the  cause  is  in  their  habits  of  life,  and  in  the 
ignorance  and  barbarity  inseparable  from  a  state  of  slavery.     I  estab- 
lished for  an  unfortunate  race  of  beings,  who  were  just  loosened  from 
the  yoke,  the  only  system  of  rule  that  was  suited  to  their  conditions 
or  capacities.     That  it  leaves  room,  in  many  instances,   for  coercion 
and  despotism,  cannot  be  denied;  but  is  the  constitution  of  the  repub- 
lic of  France,  the  most  enlightened  part  of  enlightened  Europe,  quite 
free  from  them  ?  If  thirty  millions  of  Frenchmen  find  their  happiness 
and  security,  as  I  am  told,  in  the  revolution  of  the  18th  Bruraaire, 
surely  I  should  not   be  envied   the  love  and   confidence   of  the   poor 
blacks,  ray  countrymen.     It  will  be  for  posterity  to  decide,  whether 
we  have  ruled  through  affection,  or  through  apathy  and  fear. 

"  You  offer  freedom  to  the  blacks,  and  say,  that  in  all  the  coun- 
tries you  have  been  in,  you  have  given  it  to  the  people  who  had  it 
not.  I  am  not  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  that  have 
recently  happened  in  Europe ;  but  the  reports  that  have  reached  me 
do  not  accord  with  this  assertion.  In  fact,  it  is  of  little  consequence. 
The  liberty  that  is  to  be  found  in  France,  or  Belgium,  or  Helvetia,  or 
in  the  republics,  Batavian,  Ligurian,  or  Cisalpine,  would  never  be 
cordially  received,  or  cheerfully  acquiesced  in,  by  the  people  of  St. 


236  APPENDIX. 

Domingo*     Such  changes,  or  such  freedom,  are  far,  very  far,  fronj 
being  desired,  even  by  us. 

"  You  ask  nie,  whether  I  desire  consideration,  honors,  fortune. 
Most  certainly  1  do,  but  not  of  your  giving.  My  consideration  is 
placed  in  the  respect  of  my  countrymen,  my  honors  in  their  attach- 
ment my  fortune  in  their  disinterested  fidelity.  Has  this  mean  idea 
of  personal  aggrandisement  been  held  out,  in  the  hope  that  I  would 
thereby  be  induced  to  betray  the  cause  I  have  undertaken  ?  You 
should  learn  to  estimate  the  moral  principle  of  other  men  by  your 
own  If  the  person  who  claims  a  right  to  that  throne  on  which  you 
are  seated,  were  to  call  on  you  to  descend  from  it,  what  would  be 
your  answer  ?  The  power  I  possess  has  been  as  legitimately  acquired 
as  your  own,  and  nought  but  the  decided  voice  of  the  people  of  St. 
Doniingo  shall  compel  me  to  relinquish  it. 

''  It  is  not  cemented  by  blood,  or  maintained  by  the  artifices  of 
European  policy.  '  The  ferocious  men  whose  persecutions  I  put  a 
stop  to,'  have  confessed  my  clemency,  and  I  have  pardoned  the  wretch 
whose  dagger  has  been  aimed  at  my  life.  If  I  have  removed  from 
t!)is  island  certain  turbulent  spirits,  who  strove  to  feed  the  flames  of 
civil  war,  their  guilt  had  been  first  established  bf  fore  a  competent 
tribunal  and  finally  confessed  by  themselves.  Is  there  one  of  them 
who  can  say  that  he  has  been  condemned  unheard  or  untried?  And 
yet  these  monsters  a.e  to  be  brought  back  once  more,  and,  aided  by 
thf  blood-hounds  of  Cuba,  are  to  be  uncoupled  and  hallooed  lo  hunt  us 
down  at)d  devour  us:  and  this  by  men  who  dare  to  call  themselves 
Christieins.  Why  should  it  excite  your  praise  and  surprise,  that  I 
have  upheld  '  the  rpligion  and  wor!<hij)  of  God,  from  whom  all  things 
coine  .f-"  Aas  '  that  all-bounteous  Beinsj,  whose  holy  word  has  but 
lately  found  favour  in  your  republic,  by  me  has  ever  been  honored 
and  glorified.  In  his  protecting  care,  I  have  sought,  for  safety  and 
ci.DsolatioM  amidst  dangers  and  difficulties,  when  encompassed  by 
trt  achery  and  treason,  and  I  was  never  disappointed.  Before  him 
and  ^ou,  1  am,  as  you  sav,  to  be  the  person  principally  responsible 
for  t!ie  massacres  and  murders  that  are  perpetrating  in  this  deserted 
isle.  Be  it  so.  In  his  all  just  and  dread  disposal,  be  the  issue  of  this 
contest.  Let  him  decide  between  me  and  my  enemies  ;  between  those 
who  have  violated  his  precepts  and  abjured  his  holy  name,  and  one 
who  has  never  ceased  to  acknowledge  and  adore  him. 

(Signed)  "  Toussaunt  Louverture.'-' 


APPENDIX  III. 

Order  of  the  Ceremonies  appointed  to  he  observed  on 
the  Coronaiio7i  of  Jean  Jacques,  the  first  Emperor 
of  Hnyti. 

PORT-AU-PRINCE,  Sept.  8. 

On  the  8th  of  October,  all  the  troops  of  the  garrison,  in  the  best 
order  possible,  will  march  under  arras  to  the  Champ  de  Mars,  at  two 
o'clock,  A.  M.  precisely,  and  form  in  square  battalions. 

A  detachment  of  grenadiers  immediately  to  form  a  line  to  the  house 
of  the  commandant-general  of  division. 

At  three  o'clock  the  members  of  all  the  civil  and  military  awtlwri- 
ties,  having  assembled  at  the  government-house,  will  thence  proceed 
to  the  Champ  de  Mars  in  the  following  order: — 

A  platoon  of  grenadiers — the  public  teachers,  conducting  a  great 
number  of  their  pupils — the  deputation  of  the  body  ofartizans,  pre- 
ceded by  a  chief  arlizan— a  deputation  of  agriculturalists,  preceded  by 
one  of  their  principal  members — a  deputation  of  foreign  commerce, 
preceded  by  one  of  its  members — a  deputation  of  national  commerce, 
preceded  by  one  of  its  members — the  members  of  justice,  and  the 
ministerial  officers — the  health  officers  of  the  army,  attached  to  the 
division — the  officers  of  the  military  marine — the  etat  major  of  the 
place,  connected  whh  that  of  the  circuit — the  administrators,  and  those 
in  their  employ — the  general  commanding  the  divisions,  accompanied 
by  his  dtat-major — a  platoon  of  grenadiers. 

When  they  arrive  at  the  Champ  de  Mars,  all  the  drums  shall  beat 
a  march,  and  the  procession  shall  advance  to  an  amphitheatre,  which 
shall  be  prepared  for  its  use. 

The  act,  announcing  the  nomination  of  the  "  Emperor"  (Dessa- 
lines),  shall  be  read  in  a  loud  and  intelligible  voice  ! 

A  discharge  of  musketry  and  cannon,  which  shall  be  repeated  by 
all  the  forts  of  the  city,  and  vessels  in  the  harbour,  shall  follow  the 
reading  of  the  act. 


238  APPENDIX. 

The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  shall  next  take  place  on  a  throne, 
elevated  in  the  midst  of  the  amphitheatre,  and  surrounded  by  all  the 
great  oflScers  of  the  empire. 

The  ceremony  shall  be  announced  by  a  triple  discharge  of  cannon 
and  musketry. 

After  the  ceremony,  the  troops  shall  file  off  to  the  church,  and  form 
in  order  of  battle. 

The  procession,  in  the  order  above-mentioned,  shall  also  advance 
to  the  church,  where  a  Te  Deum,  in  thanksgiving  for  this  memorable 
day,  shall  be  sung. 

During  the  Te  Deum,  a  third  discharge  of  cannon  and  musketry 
shall  take  place. 

After  the  Te  Deum,  the  procession  shall  return,  in  the  same  order, 
to  the  house  of  the  general  of  division. 

The  fete  shall  terminate  by  a  grand  illumination  in  all  parts  of  the 
city. 

Done  at  Port-au-Prince,  the  6th  September,   1804,  the  first 
year  of  Independence. 

The  general  of  division. 

(Signed)  A.  Petion. 


APPENDIX  IV. 


New  Constitution  of  Hayti. 

The  undersigned  mandatories,  charged  with  the  powers  of  the  peo- 
ple of  Hayti,  being  legally  convoked  by  his  Excellency,  the  general- 
in-chief  of  the  army,  penetrated  by  the  necessity  of  making  their  con- 
stituents enjoy  the  sacred,  imprescriptible,  and  unalienable  rights  of 
man,  proclaim,  in  the  presence  and  under  the  auspices  of  the  All- 
powerful,  the  articles  contained  in  the  present  constitutional  part : 

Title  I.     Of  the  Condition  of  Citizens. 

1  Every  person  residing  on  the  territory  of  Hayti,  is  free,  in  the 
fullest  sense. 

2.  Slavery  is  for  ever  abolished  in  Hayti. 

3.  No  one  has  a  right  to  violate  the  asylum  of  a  citizen,  nor  to 
enter  forcibly  into  his  dwelling,  without  an  order,  emanating  from  a 
superior  and  competent  authority. 

4.  All  property  is  under  the  protection  of  the  government.  Every 
attack  upon  the  property  of  a  citizen,  is  a  crime  which  the  law 
punishes. 

5.  The  law  punishes  assassination  with  death. 

Title  II.     Of  the  Government. 

8.  The  government  of  Hayti  is  composed : — First,  of  a  chief 
magistrate,  who  takes  the  title  and  quality  of  president  and  general- 
issimo of  the  forces  of  Hayti,  both  by  land  and  sea  :  every  other  de- 
nomination is  forever  prescribed  in  Hayti: — Secondly,  of  a  council 
of  state. 

The  go\^ernment  of  Hayti  takes  the  title,  and  will  be  known  by  the 
denomination  of"  The  State  of  Hayti." 


240  APPENDIX. 

7.  The  constitution  names  the  general-in-chief.  Henry  Christophe, 
president  and  generalissimo  of  the  forces,  both  by  sea  and  land,  of 
the  State  of  Hayti. 

8.  The  trust  of  president  and  generalissimo  of  the  forces,  is  for 
life. 

9.  The  president  has  the-  right  of  choosing  his  successor,  but  only 
from  among  the  generals,  and  in  the  manner  hereafter  prescribed  : — 
This  choice  must  be  secret,  and  contained  in  a  sealed  packet,  which 
shall  be  only  opened  by  the  council  of  state,  solemnly  assembled  for  that 
purpose.  The  president  shall  take  all  necessary  precautions  for  in- 
forming the  council  of  state  where  this  packet  shall  be  deposited. 

10.  The  armed  force  shall  be  under  the  direction  of  the  president, 
as  also  the  administration  of  the  finances. 

11.  The  president  has  the  power  to  make  treaties  with  foreign 
nations,  as  well  as  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  commercial  rela- 
tions, as  to  secure  the  independence  of  the  state. 

12.  He  is  to  conclude  peace,  and  to  declare  war,  to  maintain  the 
rights  of  the  people  of  Hayti. 

13.  He  has  also  the  right  to  consider  of  the  means  of  favouring 
and  increasing  the  population  of  the  country. 

14.  He  is  to  propose  the  laws  to  the  council  of  state,  who,  after 
having  adopted  them  and  drawn  them  up,  are  to  send  them  back  to 
him  for  his  sanction,  without  which  they  cannot  be  executed. 

15.  The  appointments  of  the  president  are  fixed  at  40,000  dollars 
a  year. 

Title  IH.     Of  the  Council  of  State. 

16.  The  council  of  state  is  composed  of  nine  members,  nominated 
by  the  president ;  of  wl\om  two-thirds,  at  least,  are  to  be  generals. 

17.  The  functions  of  the  council  of  state  are  to  receive  the  propo- 
sitions of  laws  from  the  president,  and  to  draw  them  up  in  the  manner 
they  may  judge  advisable  ;  to  fix  the  amount  of  taxes,  and  the  mode 
of  collecting  them ;  to  sanction  the  treaties  concluded  by  the  presi- 
dent ;  and  to  fix  upon  the  mode  for  recruiting  the  army.  An  account 
shall  be  presented  to  them,  annually,  of  the  receipts  and  expenses, 
and  of  the  resources  of  the  country. 

[The  IV.  V.  and  VI.  titles  respect  the  appointment  of  a  superin- 


APPENDIX.  241 

tendent  general  of  the  finances,  the  marine,  and  the  interior;  and  also 
the  appointment  of  a  secretary  of  state,  and  the  tribunals.] 

Title  VI [.     Of  Religim. 

The  cathoh'c,  apostolic,  and  Roman  religion  is  the  only  one  ac- 
knowledged by  the  government. 

The  exercise  of  other  religions  is  tolerated,  but  not  publicly. 

Title  VIII.      Of  Public  Education. 

There  shall  be  established  a  central  school  in  each  division,  and 
particular  schools  in  each  subdivision. 

Title  IX.     Of  the  guarantee  of  the  neighbouring  Colonies. 

The  government  of  Hayti  declares  to  those  powers  who  have  colo- 
nies in  its  neighbourhood,  its  fixed  determination  to  give  no  distur- 
bance to  the  government  of  these  colonies. 

The  people  of  Hayti  make  no  conquests  out  of  their  own  island ; 
and  they  confine  themselves  to  the  preservation  of  their  own  territory, 

[After  these  nine  heads,  follow  some  general  regulations,  the  prin- 
cipal of  which  are, — that  every  Haytian,  from  sixteen  to  fifty,  can  be 
called  into  the  army,  whenever  the  safety  of  the  state  requires  it ;  that 
the  government  solemnly  guarantees  to  foreign  merchants  the  security 
of  their  persons  and  properties ;  divorce  is  strictly  forbidden  j 
and  agriculture,  which  is  declared  to  be  the  most  ancient,  noble,  and 
useful  of  all  the  arts,  is  to  be  encouraged  and  protected,] 


32 


APPENDIX  V. 

Constitutional  Law  of  the  Council  of  State  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  Royalty  in  Hayti. 

ACT  I. 

Of  the  Supreme  Authority. 

ARTICLE    I. 

The  president.  Henry  Chrlstophe,  is  declared  king  of  Hayti,  under 
the  name  of  Henry. 

Tiiis  title,  with  its  prerogatives  and  privilesres,  shall  be  hereditary  in 
the  male  and  legitimate  descendants  of  his  family  in  a  direct  line,  by 
elder  birthright,  to  the  exclusion  of  females. 

Art.  2.  All  the  acts  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  in  the  name  of  the  king, 
published  anrj  promulgated  under  the  royal  seal. 

Art.  3,  In  default  of  male  children  in  a  direct  line,  the  succession 
shall  pass  into  the  family  of  the  prince  nearest  akin  to  the  sovereign, 
or  the  most  ancient  in  dignity. 

Art  4.  In  default  of  an  heir-apparent,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  king 
to  adopt  the  children  of  such  prince  of  the  kingdom  as  he  shall  judge 
proper. 

Art.  5.  If  there  happen  to  be  male  children  born  after  such  adop- 
tion, their  right  of  succession  shall  prevail  over  that  of  the  adopted 
children.  • 

Art.  6.  At  the  decease  of  the  king,  and  until  bis  successor  be  ac- 
knowledged, the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  governed  by  the 
ministers  and  the  king's  council,  who  shall  jointly  form  a  general 
Council ;  their  decisions  to  be  determined  by  a  majority  of  votes^ 
and  the  secretary  of  state  to  keep  a  record  of  the  deliberations,- 


APPENDIX.  243 

ACT   II. 

Of  the  Royal  Family. 

Art.  7.  The  king's  consort  is  declared  queen  of  Hayti. 

Art.  8.  The  members  of  the  royal  fa  nily  shall  bear  the  title  of 
Princes  and  Princesses  :  they  are  to  be  styleH  Royal  Highnesses,  and 
the  heir-apparent  is  to  be  denominated  Prince  Royal. 

Art.  9.  The  princes  are  to  take  their  seats  as  members  of  the 
council  of  state,  on  their  coming  of  age. 

Art.  10.  The  royal  princess  and  princesses  are  not  at  liberty  to 
marry  without  the  approbation  of  the  king. 

Art.  11.  The  king  himself  directs  the  organization  of  his  palace  in 
a  manner  conformable  to  the  dignity  of  the  crown 

Art.  12.  Ihere  shall  be  established,  by  the  orders  of  the  king, 
palaces  and  castles  in  those  parts  of  the  kingdom  which  he  shall  judge 
proper  to  fix  upon. 

ACT  III. 

Of  the  Regency, 

Art.  13.  The  king  is  a  minor  until  he  shall  have  completed  his  fif- 
teenth year:  during  his  minority  he  shall  be  styled  regent  of  the 
kingdom. 

Art.  14.  The  protector  shall  be  at  least  twenty-five  years  of  age, 
and  shall  be  chosen  from  among  the  princes  most  nearly  related  to 
the  king  (to  the  exclusion  of  females,)  and  in  default  of  such,  from 
among  the  great  dignitaries  of  the  kingdom. 

Art.  15.  In  default  of  the  appointment  of  a  protector  on  the  part 
of  the  king,  the  general  council  shall  select  one  in  the  manner  pre- 
scribed in  the  foregoing  article. 

Art.  16.  The  protector  is  to  exercise,  until  the  king  be  of  age,  all  the 
attributes  of  the  royal  dignity. 

Art.  17.  He  cannot  conclude  any  treaty  of  peace,  alliance,  or 
commerce,  nor  make  any  declaration  of  war,  but  after  mature  delibe- 
ration, and  with  the  advice  of  the  general  council:  their  opinions 
^hall  be  taken  according  to  the  majority  of  votes;  and  in  case  of 
equality,  that  side  which  accords  with  the  opinion  of  the  protector  shall 
preponderate. 


^44 


APPENDIX. 


Art.  18,  The  protector  cannot  nominate,  either  to  the  great  dig- 
nities of  the  kingdom,  or  to  the  situations  of  general  officers  in  the 
land  or  sea  forces. 

Art  19.  All  the  acts  of  the  regency  are  in  the  name  of  the  king, 
who  is  minor. 

Art.  20.  The  care  of  the  king,  during  his  minority,  is  confided  to 
his  mother;  and  in  default  of  a  mother,  to  the  prince  appointed  by 
the  late  king. 

Neither  the  protector,  nor  his  descendants,  shall  be  eligible  for  the 
charge  of  the  king,  who  is  minor. 

ACT  IV. 

Of  the  Great  Council,  and  of  the  Privy  Council. 

Art.  21.  The  great  council  is  composed  of  the  princes  of  the  blood, 
of  princes,  dukes,  and  counts,  nominated  and  chosen  by  his  majestj'  j 
who  is  also  to  fix  their  number. 

Art.  22.  The  king  is  to  preside  at  the  council,  and  when  he  does 
not  preside  in  person,  shall  appoint  one  of  the  dignitaries  of  the  king- 
dom to  fulfil  that  office. 

Art  23.  The  privy  council  shall  be  chosen  by  the  king  from  among 
the  great  dignitaries  of  the  kingdom. 

ACT  V. 

Of  the  Great  Officers  of  the  Kingdom. 

Art.  24.  Tlie  great  officers  of  the  kingdom  are  grand  marshals  of 
Hayti :  they  are  to  be  chosen  from  among  the  generals  of  all  ranks, 
according  to  merit. 

Art  25.  Their  number  is  not  limited ;  but  to  be  determined  by  the 
king  at  every  promotion. 

Art   26.  The  places  of  great  officers  of  thje  kingdom  are  for  life. 

Art.  27.  When,  by  the  king's  order,  or  on  account  of  being  in- 
valid, any  one  of  the  great  officers  of  the  kingdom  shall  cease  to  be 
actively  eiiployed,  he  shall  nevertheless  retain  his  titles,  his  rank, 
and  the  half  of  his  pay. 


APPENDIX.  245 

ACT  VI. 
Of  the  Ministry, 

Art.  28.  There  shall  be  four  ministers  chosen  and  appointed  by 
the  king : 

The  minister  of  war  and  marine ; 

The  minister  of  finances  and  of  the  interior  ; 

The  minister  of  foreign  affairs  ;  and 

The  minister  of  justice. 

Art  29.  The  ministers  shall  be  members  of  the  council,  and  have 
a  deliberative  voice. 

Art.  30.  The  ministers  shall  account  directly  to  his  majesty,  and 
receive  his  orders. 

ACT  VII. 

Of  the  Oaths. 

Art.  31.  The  king  at  his  accession,  or  on  his  coming  of  age,  shall 
take  an  oath  upon  the  gospels,  in  the  presence  of  the  great  authorities 
of  the  kingdom. 

Art.  32.  The  protector,  before  entering  upon  his  functions,  shall 
also  take  an  oalh,  with  the  same  formalities. 

Art.  33.  The  principal  clergy ,  the  great  officers,  the  ministers,  and  the 
secretary  of  state,  shall  also  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  at  the  king's  hands. 

ACT  VIIL 

Of  the  Promulgation. 

Art.  34.  The  promulgation  of  all  the  acts  of  the  kingdom  shall 
begin  in  the  following  form: 

"  We,  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  constitutional  law  of  the  state, 
king  of  Hayti,  to  all  present  and  to  come,  greeting." 

And  all  public  acts  shall  conclude  thus: 

"  We  do  hereby  order  and  command,  that  these  presents,  sealed 
■with  our  seal,  be  addressed  to  all  courts,  tribunals,  and  administrative 
authorities,  to  be  transcribed  into  their  registers,  to  be  observed  and 


246  APPENDIX. 

caused  to  be  observed  throughout  the  kingdom;  and  the  minister  of 
justice  is  charg^ed  with  the  promulgation  thereof." 

Art.  35,  The  executory  proceedings  in  judgments  of  the  courts  of 
justice  of  the  tribunals,  are  to  run  thus  : 

"We,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  constitutional  law  of  the  state, 
king  of  Hayti,  to  all  present  and  to  come,  greeting." 

Then  shall  follow  the  copy  of  the  judgment  or  decree  :  "  We  order 
and  command  all  constables  and  other  officers,  on  this  requisition,  to 
put  into  execution  the  said  judgment,  and  our  attorneys  in  the  tribunals 
to  promote  the  same ;  and  the  commandants  and  officers  of  the  public 
force  to  assist,  whensoever  they  shall  legally  be  required  so  to  do.  In 
testiipony  of  which,  the  present  judgment  has  been  signed  by  the  pre- 
sident of  the  court,  and  the  register." 

Done  by  the  council  of  state  of  Hayti,  at  Cape  Henry,  the  28th 
March,  1811,  the  8th  year  of  independence. 

Signed — Paul  Remain,  senior ;  Andrew  Vernet,  Toussatnt  Brave^ 
Jean  Philippe,  Daux,  Martial  Besse,  Jean  Pierre  Richard^  Jean 
Fleur^f  Jean  Babtiste  Juge,  Etienne  Magni/,  Secretary. 


APPENDIX  VI. 

Abstract  of  the  Royal  Almanac  ofHayti^for  the  year  1314. 

It  commences  with  a  calendar  for  the  year,  containing  all  the 
usual  information  which  calendars  are  intended  to  give;  and,  among 
the  rest,  the  saints'  days  of  the  Romish  church  :  also  the  festivals  of 
the  patron  saints  of  all  the  parishes  into  which  Christophe's  dominions 
are  divided  and  the  national  festivals,  of  which  there  are  seven,  viz. 
— the  festival  of  independence ;  of  the  foundation  of  the  monarchy ; 
of  the  coronation  of  the  king  and  queen  ;  of  the  birthdays  of  the  king, 
queen,  and  prince  royal ;  and  of  agriculture. 

Next  follows  a  very  brief  sketch  of  the  kingdom  of  Hayti.  The 
principles  of  the  feudal  government  are  said  to  be  unknown;  but 
titles  of  hereditary  nobility,  and  the  royal  and  military  order  of  St. 
Henry,  are  the  recompences  destined  for  those  who  devote  their  lives 
to  the  public  service,  or  who  shed  their  blood  for  their  king  and  coun- 
try, A  great  council  of  state,  and  a  privy  council,  composed  of  the 
great  dignitaries  and  other  officers  of  the  kingdom,  consult  on  such 
matters  as  the  king  submits  to  them.  The  business  of  the  state  is 
conducted  by  four  ministers,  viz. — of  war  and  the  marine,  of  the  finances, 
of  foreign  afftirs,  and  of  justice;  and  a  secretary  of  state.  A  selec- 
tion from  the  army,  equipped  with  the  utmost  care,  forms  the  royal 
guards.  The  army  itself  is  inured  to  war,  and  well  disciplined:  its 
battalions  are  always  complete;  its  officers  of  tried  valour  and  skill; 
and  the  military  employment  is  that  which  is  most  highly  honoured 
in  Hayti :  it  is  the  great  object  of  the  ambition  of  parents  for  their 
children.  "  The  legislation  consists  of  a  code  of  laws,  simple,  clear, 
precise,and  adapted  to  the  manners,  usages,  and  character  of  the  people.^^ 
*'  An  agricultural  code  ;  a  thing  unexampled  among  other  nations, 
which  it  has  occupied  the  main  solicitude  of  the  king  to  form,  regulates 
the  reciprocal  duties  of  proprietors,  tenants,  and  cultivators ;  the  po- 


248  APPENDIX. 

lice  of  the  plantations;  the  culture  and  preparation  of  the  different 
products  of  the  soil ;  and,  in  short,  the  whole  rural  economy  of  Hayti. 
The  principles  of  this  code  are  laid  in  justice,  equity  and  humanity. 
The  labourers  have  been  restored  to  the  rank  of  freemen.  Industry 
is  encouraged  as  the  parent  of  virtue;  and  idleness,  repressed  by  law, 
as  the  source  of  vice.  In  short,  the  traces  of  the  former  odious  system, 
have  vanished  for  ever  from  the  soil  of  Hayti."  The  government 
does  all  in  its  power  to  encourage  agriculture,  as  the  grand  source  of 
prosperity.  But  beside  this,  various  manufactures  have  been  estab- 
lished, with  a  fair  prospect  of  success  Great  attention  is  paid  to 
morals  and  manners.  Marriage  is  honoured,  protected,  and  encour- 
aged ;  no  Hayiian  who  is  unmarried  can  fill  any  place  of  distinction. 
Divorce  is  not  permitted.  The  Catholic  religion  has  resumed  its 
splendor;  the  hierarchy  consists  of  an  archbishop,  three  bishops,  and 
a  cure  in  each  parish  Great  encouragement  is  held  out  to  foreign 
mercha  its  to  settle  in  Hayti :  the  king  is  ready  even  to  assist  them 
with  capital,  and  many  have  received  important  aid  from  him. 

Next  follows  the  ''  Livre  Rouge,"  the  •'  Court  Calendar"  of  Hayti. 

The  first  chapter  Is  entitled  the  "  Royal  Family,"  and  gives  the 
usual  particulars  respecting  his  majesty  Henry,  king  of  Hayti.  and 
her  majesty  Maria  Louisa,  queen  of  iayti:  their  children,  of  whom 
there  are  four,  two  sons  and  two  daughters ;  and  the  princes  of  the 
blood. 

The  second  chapter  contains  the  names  and  titles  of  the  great  offi- 
cers of  state;  the  colonel-general  of  the  Haytian  guards,  the  grand 
marshal  of  Hayti,  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs  and  secretary  of  state, 
the  archbishop,  grand  almoner  to  the  king,  the  grand  master  of  the 
ceremonies. 

The  third  chapter  contains  a  list  of  the  nobility,  consisting,  beside 
the  princes  of  the  blood,  of  ''  three  princes  of  the  kingdom,"  eight 
dukes,  twenty  counts,  thirty-seven  barons,  and  eleven  chevaliers. 

The  fourth  chapter  gives  the  hoDsehold  establishment  of  the  king, 
queen,  prince  royal,  and  princesses  royal,  and  the  king's  household 
troops.  It  mentions  nine  ro\'al  palaces,  and  eight  royal  chaleaus- 
One  of  the  palaces  is  called  ''  Le  Palais  de  Sans  Souci;''  and  one  of 
the  chateaus,  "  Le  Chateau  des  Delices  de  la  Reine."  There  are  the 
usual  number  of  chamberlains,  secretaries,  librarians,  pages,  gover- 
nors of  palaces,  physicians,  surgeons,  &c.  &c.  The"  The  xMaison 
Militaire  du  Roi,"  consists  of  the  "  Etat  Major  General,"  a  corps  of 


APPENDIX.  249 

"horse  artillery,  two  companies  of  boly  jruards,  thre-^  sqimrlrons  of 
light  horse,  and  a  regiment  of  grenadier  infantry,  consisting  of  five 
battalions. 

The  fifth  chapter  contains  a  list  of  the  grand  coimcil  of  state  and 
the  priyv  council.  The  grand  council  of  state  forms  also  the  high 
court  of  justice  for  the  trial  of  royal  or  noble  delinquents,  and  of  pub- 
lic functionaries  charged  with  malversation  in  office.  To  it  is  also  com- 
mitted the  trial  of  treasonable  attemjjts  or  conspiracies;  and  it  forms, 
moreover,  a  court  of  appeal  from  the  inferior  tribunals. 

The  sixth  chapter  contains  an  account  of  the  royal  and  military 
order  of  St.  Henry.  The  order  is  endowed  with  an  annual  income 
of  30(»,000  livres. 

The  seventh  chapter  contains  a  detail  of  the  different  departments 
of  the  state,  the  secretary  of  state's  office,  the  chancery,  the  depart- 
ment of  war  and  marine,  that  of  the  finances  and  the  interior,  that  of 
justice,  and  that  of  grand  admiral. 

The  eighth  chapter  is  entitled,  "  The  Clergy."  The  Romaa 
Catholic  religion  is  stated  to  be  the  only  one  recognized  and  publicly 
exercised  in  Hayti  The  archbishop,  who  was  consecrated  by  the 
archbishop  of  Palermo,  has  a  chapter,  a  seminary,  and  a  college  at- 
tached to  his  metropolitan  see,  and  all  well  endowed.  He  has  also 
three  archi-episcopal  palaces  assigned  to  him.  The  bishops  have  each 
a  chapter  and  a  seminary,  endowed  with  considerable  revenues.  "  The 
royal  and  parochial  church  of  Sans  Souci,"it  is  stated  ^'  is  a  majestic 
structure,  erected  by  the  king,  and  stands  a  monument  of  his  royal 
munificence  and  piety."  The  pope  had  been  supplicated  to  confirm 
the  ecclesiastical  appointments. 

The  ninth  chapter  is  entitled  the  "  Military  Organization  of  the 
Kingdom,''  and  occupies  fifty  seven  pa,es.  It  contains  a  list  both  of 
the  army  and  navy  ;  the  army  consisting  of  fifty  battalions,  and  the 
navy  of  two  rear  admirals,  two  chiefs  of  division,  two  captains  of  ships, 
fou>  captains  of  frigates,  &c. 

The  tenth  chapter  gives  a  list  of  the  intendants  and  officers  of  the 
finances,  customs,  &c. ;  of  the  surveyors  of  gardens,  waters,  forests, 
buildings;  directors  of  the  mint;  superintendents  of  weights,  mea- 
sures, &c. 

The  eleventh  chaptercontainsthejudicia'-y  organization  ;  a  list  of  the 
supreme  court,  and  the  barristers  and  solicitois  ol  the  superior  courts; 

33 


250  APPENDIX. 

of  the  judges  and  officers  of  the  courts  of  admiralty,  and  parochial 
jurisdiction:  and  of  the  notaries,  surveyors,  and  auctioneers 

The  twelfth  chapter  details  the  regulations  of  the  post-office. 

The  thirteenth  chapter  is  entitled  "  Public  Instruction,"  and  gives 
an  account  of  the  schools  established  by  the  king,  who  supports  the 
professors  and  teachers,  and  gives  annual  prizes  to  the  most  distin- 
guished scholars. 

The  fourteenth  chapter  is  entitled  the  ''  Fine  Arts,''  and  contains  a 
list  of  the  royal  acailemy  of  music,  and  of  the  royal  painters. 

The  jfifteenth  chapter  gives  a  list  of  the  performers  at  the  theatre 
royal :  and  the  sixteenth,  a  list  of  the  persons  who  have  charge  of  the 
royal  breeding  studs,  and  flocks  of  sheep. 

The  whole  closes  with  an  account  of  the  etiquette  of  the  court ; 
the  ceremony  of  presentations  and  audiences  ;  of  levee  days,  which 
are  fixed  for  every  Thursday,  at  ten  in  the  morning  ;  and  of  drawing- 
room  days,  which  are  fixed  at  five  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day. 
Petitions  may  be  presented  to  the  king,  and  answers  will  be  given  on 
the  following  Thursday. 


APPENDIX  VIL 


Dispatch  from  Comte  de  Limonade,  secretary  of  state, 
and  minister  for  foreign  affairs  of  Christophe,  to 
M.  Peltier^  in  London ;  dated  from  the  palace  of 
Sans  Souct,  June  lUi/i,  1814. 


«  Sm, 
"  Your  dispatches  of  the  21st  of  March  and  6th  of  April  last,  and 
their  duplicates,  reached  me  by  the  F^nglish  brig  Vigilant,  Captain 
Fknai;;an,  which  entered  the  port  of  Capp  Henry,  on  the  19th  of  May  ; 
and  by  the  Bedford,  Captain  Stiickfield  :  and  the  Smolensk,  Captain 
Jowsey,  which  entered  yesterday ;  bringing  me  your  Ambigus,  ga- 
zettes, and  other  papers,  &c. 

^'  I  have  laid  these  dispatches  before  the  king,  who  heard  them  read 
with  all  the  -ittention  which  they  merit. 

"  The  details  which  you  give  us  of  the  great  events  that  have  taken 
place  in  Europe,  and  particularly  in  France,  have  afforded  the  king 
much  satisfaction  The  king,  who  had  attentively  observed  the  train 
of  events  which  took  place  after  the  retreat  of  Napolean  from  Moscow, 
and  successively  those  of  Germany,  had  concluded  that  Napolean, 
without  the  entire  support  of  the  French  people,  by  a  levy  en  masse, 
could  never  make  head  against  his  numerous  enemies,  who  were  so 
much  the  more  formidable,  because  they  were  instructed  by  experi- 
ence ;  because  they  had  long-standing  quarrels  to  revenge ;  because 
the  safety  and  the  honor  of  their  thrones  were  at  stake ;  because  they 
felt  the  necessity  of  uniting,  to  form  a  mass  of  active  force  which 
nothing  could  withstand.  His  majesty,  calcniating  the  immense  losses 
sustained  by  the  French,  and  the  new  sacrifices  which  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make,  foresaw,  that  if  Napolean  were  not  seconded  by 
the  people,  he  would  inevitably  sink.     His  majesty  thought  besides, 


252  APPENDIX. 

that  if  Napolean  fell,  he  would  not  fail  to  bury  himself  under  the 
ruins  :  but  his  majesty  could  never  have  divined  that  he  would  close 
his  career  in  a  manner  so  little  worthy  of  a  soldier.  His  majesty's 
prognostics  have  been  partly  verified  in  the  subjugation  of  the  impla- 
cable enemy  of  the  world  ;  but  the  repose  of  the  world  will  never  be 
secure  while  Napolean  lives. 

"  In  the  return  to  philanthropic  principles,  which  the  governments 
of  Europe  appear  desirous  of  adopting,  his  majesty  perceives  new 
means  of  security  to  his  kingdom.  His  majesty,  however,  since  the 
expulsion  of  the  sattellites  of  Napolean  from  the  soil  of  Hayti,  has 
never  ceased  preparing  himself  for  war,  and  for  the  most  obstinate 
resistance,  in  the  event  of  an  invasion  of  his  kingdom.  His  prepara- 
tions have  been  still  further  augmented  by  the  complete  organization 
of  his  troops,  the  provisioning  of  his  fortresses  and  other  means  of 
defence  liich  have  been  recently  taken,  since  the  first  overtures  for 
peace  between  Napolean  and  England,  through  the  mediation  of 
Austria,  which  we  learned  here  from  the  newspapers  ;  and  especially 
ill  consequence  of  the  various  notices  and  valuable  information  which 
you  have  given  us,  and  which  has  enabled  his  majesty  to  take  all 
suitable  measures. 

"  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  policy  of  his  majesty  has  led  him  to 
measures  of  prudence  necessary  for  his  safety,  he  has  not,  on  the  other, 
neglected  to  cause  cultivation  to  flourish,  as  you  will  be  convinced  by 
the  immense  quantity  of  colonial  produce  which  issues  from  the  ports 
of  this  island 

"  You  must  have  seen,  from  the  various  acts  of  his  majesty's  govern- 
ment, since  his  accession  to  the  throne,  that  his  majesty  has  never 
confounded  the  French  people  with  the  governments  which  oppressed 
them.  To  peacealde  merchants  he  has  always  ofifered  security,  pro- 
tection, and  comuierce,  at  the  same  time  that  he  was  determined  to 
repel  every  kind  of  enemy  who  should  attempt  to  reduce  us  to  slavery. 
''  You  may  declare.  Sir,  as  you  are  now  authorised  to  do,  that  his 
majesty  will  with  pleasure  receive  the  vessels  of  French  merchants, 
which  shall  be  legally  cleared  out  for  the  ports  of  Hayti.  They  shall 
be  protected  and  treated  like  the  subjects  of  other  friendly  powers  who 
trade  peaceably  with  Hayii,  provided  ihey  punctually  conform  to  the 
laws  of  the  kins^flom.  You  may  give  this  assurance  to  the  French 
merchants,  and  even  publish  it  in  your  journals. 

"  A  new  order  of  things  arises :  his  majesty  embraces  the  consoling 


APPENDIX.  253 

hope  of  finding  a  just  and  philanthropic  government,  which,  convin- 
ced that  force  is  powerless  to  reduce  us  to  subjection,  will  not  forget, 
among  our  claims,  that  of  having  combatted  its  most  implacable  er>- 
emy  from  the  commencement  of  his  reign  to  his  fall,  and  never  having 
listened  to  any  of  those  proposals  which  his  aijents,  from  all  countries, 
have  made  to  us.  His  majesty  flatters  himself  that  he  will  find  hu- 
mane sentiments  in  a  sovereign  instructed  by  misfortune. 

"  In  our  state  of  uncertainty,  as  to  the  measures  of  the  new  sove- 
reign of  France  with  regard  to  us,  we  cannot  take  any  direct  course 
or  step,  as  you  i  ivited  us,  until  we  are  positively  informed  as  to  his 
intentions.  It  is  for  you,  Sir,  who,  with  unbounded  attachment  and 
fidelity,  have  constantly  defended  the  interests  of  the  too-long  unfor- 
tunate monarch  whom  you  serve;  it  is  for  you,  who  are  much  attached 
to  the  cause  of  King  Henry,  and  who  possess  information  respecting  this 
country,  to  prepare  the  channels  by  which  the  two  powers  may  come 
to  an  understanding  for  their  mutual  interest,  and  the  benefit  of  their 
respective  subjects.  When  this  is  done,  you  need  not  doubt  that  his 
majesty  will  listen  to  such  just  and  reasonable  proposals  as  may  be 
made  to  him,  and  will  hasten  to  appoint  an  accredited  representative, 
to  stipulate  for  his  interests,  and  those  of  his  kingdom. 

(Signed)  "  De  LimonAde." 


APPENDIX  VIII. 

Letter  from  an  English  merchant,  at  Port-au-Prince, 
dated  August  Ist,  1814. 


"  The  present  is  to  give  you  some  idea  of  our  situation  and 
prospects  since  the  late  sjreat  change  of  affairs  on  the  continent.  I 
really  anticipate,  with  feelings  of  horror,  the  scenes  of  bloodshed  and 
massacre  that  must  take  place  in  this  island,  in  the  event  of  the  French 
attacking  it.  The  people,  according  to  their  present  feeling,  could 
not  bear,  with  patience,  any  proposal  from  France,  inconsistent  with 
principles  of  independence.  I  have  been  on  intimate  terms  with 
president  Petion  for  years,  and  can  assure  you,  a  more  virtuous  and 
amiable  man  I  never  knew.  He  is  the  idol  of  the  people,  and  their 
confidence  in  him  is  unbounded ;  but  even  he  would  be  removed  from 
po'.ver,  were  he  supposed  capable  of  a  wish  to  transfer  this  colony  to 
France.  Our  information  bids  us  to  expect  an  attack  in  December.  It 
has  been  officially  notified  by  government,  that,  on  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  enemy,  fire  will  be  communicated  to  all  the  buildings  in  the 
cities,  and  every  thing  will  be  destroyed.  With  this  information,  we 
have  the  consoling  promise,  that,  whenever  the  enemy  is  driven  out, 
and  the  finances  put  in  order,  we  shall  all  be  paid  our  debts  and 
losses. 

"  It  is,  indeed,  a  sight  that  makes  humanity  shudder,  to  see  the 
preparations  making  for  the  destruction  of  the  cities  and  every  thing 
in  them,  not  portable  to  the  mountains.  The  arsenals  are  filled  with 
torches  ready  to  be  lighted.  If  a  suggestion  is  whispered  at  the 
governm^^nt-house,  questioning  the  policy,  the  reply  is,  "  Look 
at  Moscow  :"  adding,  "  that  had  Moscow  not  been  destroyed,  Na- 
polean  would  still  remain  the  despot  of  Europe." 

"I  confess  the  reasoning  appears  sound.  For  my  part,  Ihopel  shall  so 
far  close  my  aff"airs,that  I  shall  not  be  an  eye  witness  of  the  tragical  scenes 
that  must  take  place  here.   The  two  parties,  those  of  Petion  and  Christo- 


APPENDIX.  255 

phe,  can  bring  into  the  field  upwards  of  sixty  thousand  fi£rhtingmen,inthe 
event  ofa  French  invasion:  and  the  soldiers  are  innred  to  fatigue  and  dan- 
ger. In  truth,  I  have  witnessed,  in  the  seige  of  this  city,  acts  of  bravery, 
in  whole  regiments,  that  would  do  honor  to  the  finest  troops  in  Eu- 
rope. AH  their  forts  and  strong  places  in  the  mountains  are  filling 
with  cured  provisions  of  the  country,  and  amunjtion.  Such  is  the 
present  state  of  Hayti,  and  such  are  the  preoarations  making  for  hu- 
man destruction  j  and  all  under  the  administration  of  an  enlightened, 
virtuous  man.  My  soul  sinks  within  me  when  I  contemplate  it.  The 
idea  of  destroying  so  many  human  beings,  is  '  neither  charitable  in 
conception,  nor  easy  in  execution.'  A  few  months  will  decide,  whether 
the  finest  country  in  the  western  world,  is  to  be  a  dreary  desert,  or  a 
flourishing  state." 


APPENDIX  IX. 
KINGDOM  OF  HAYTL 

Manifesto  of  the  King. 

SovERErcN  of  a  nation  too  lon^  oppressed,  a  nation  which  has  suf- 
fered the  most  cruel  persecutions,  and  which,  by  its  energy,  con- 
stancy, courage,  and  valor,  has  succeeded  in  acquiring  liberty  and 
independence ;  the  only  object  of  our  constant  solicitude  has  been 
to  give  it  a  place  among  civilized  states,  by  incessant  labors  for  the 
happiness  of  the  virtuous,  brave,  and  generous  people,  who  have  en- 
trusted us  with  their  destinies. 

It  is  under  the  present  favourable  circumstances,  now  when  liberai 
and  healing  opinions  appear  to  efface  the  memory  of  those  disastrous 
times,  in  which  mankind  groaned  under  the  most  dreadful  oppression  : 
now,  when  we  see  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  occupied  in  promoting 
the  welfare  of  their  subjects,  that  we  deem  it  our  duty  to  raise  our 
voice,  to  juscify,  at  the  tribunal  of  nations,  the  legitimacy  of  our  in- 
dependence. 

A  simple  statement  of  facts,  a  plain  narrative  of  the  events  which 
have  led  to  our  independence,  will  be  sufficient  to  demonstrate  to 
the  whole  world  our  rights  and  the  justice  of  our  cause. 

We  will  not  attempt  to  describe  the  deplorable  situation  into  which 
we  M'ere  plunged  before  the  epoch  of  our  emancipation.  The  world 
knows  how,  for  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  we  groaned  un- 
der the  grievous  yoke  oi  slavery,  doomed  to  contempt  and  suffering. 
The  tale  of  our  long-continued  misfortunes,  and  the  description  of  the 
horrible  tortures  that  we  endured  beneath  the  colonial  system,  are 
the  province  of  history,  which  will  transmit  them  to  posterity. 

We  hasten  from  this  period  of  disgrace  and  iniquity,  to  arrive  at 
the  epoch  when  universal  liberty  was  proclaimed  by  the  agents  of  the 
French  government,  and  sanctioned  by  France  herself,  during  several 


APPENDIX.  257 

years  of  connexion  and  communication,  and  of  mutual  and  uninter- 
rupted correspondence,  between  the  governments  of  the  two  coun- 
tries 

We  merited  the  blessiiigs  of  liberty,  by  our  faithful  attachment  to 
the  mother  country :  we  proved  our  gratitude  to  her,  when,  reduced 
to  our  own  resources  ;  deprived  pf  all  communication  with  the  parent 
state,  we  resisted  every  seduction  ;  when,  inflexible  to  menaces,  deaf 
to  propositions,  inaccessible  to  artifice,  we  braved  misery,  famine, 
and  privations  of  every  kind,  and  finally  triumphed  over  her  enemies, 
both  external  and  internal. 

We  were  then  t*ar  from  anticipating,  that  twelve  years  after,  as  a 
reward  for  so  much  perseverance,  so  many  sacrifices,  and  so  much 
bl  )od,  France  would  desire  to  deprive  us,  in  a  manner  the  most  bar- 
barous, of  that  most  precious  of  all  possessions,  Liberty. 

Under  the  administration  of  the  governor-general,  Toussaint  Lou- 
verture,  Hayti  was  rising  from  its  ashes;  every  thingr  seemed  to 
promise  a  happy  futurity.  The  arrival  of  General  Hedouville  en- 
tirely changed  the  aspect  of  affairs,  and  gave  a  mortal  blow  to  public 
tranquillity.  We  shall  not  enter  into  a  detail  of  his  intrigues  with 
the  Haytian  General  Rigaud,  whom  he  persuaded  to  rebel  against  his 
legitimate  chief;  we  shall  only  say,  that,  before  he  quitted  the  island, 
this  agent  brought  every  thing  into  confusion,  by  throwing  among  us 
the  brands  of  discord,  and  lighting  up  the  torch  of  civil  war ;  and  it 
was  not  till  after  torrents  of  blood  had  been  shed,  that  tranquillity 
Avas  re-established. 

Always  intent  upon  the  restoration  and  establishment  of  peace, 
Toussaint  Louverture,  by  his  paternal  administration,  had  reinstated, 
in  full  force,  law,  morals,  religion,  education,  and  industry.  Agri- 
culture and  commerce  were  flourishing.  He  favoured  the  white  colo- 
nists, particularly  the  planters;  and  his  attentions  and  partialities  had 
been  carried  to  such  a  length,  that  he  was  loudly  blamed  for  being 
more  attached  to  them  than  to  people  of  his  own  colour.  Nor  was 
this  reproach  without  some  foundation ;  for  a  few  months  before  the 
arrival  of  the  French,  he  sacrificed  his  own  nephew,  General  Moise, 
because  he  had  disobeyed  his  orders  for  the  protection  of  the  colo- 
nists. That  act  of  the  governor,  and  the  great  confidence  he  placed 
in  the  French  government,  were  the  principal  causes  of  the  feeble 
resistance  which  the  French  met  with  in  Hayti.  Indeed,  so  great 
was  his  confidence  in  that  government,  that  he  had  discharged  most  of 

34 


258  APPENDIX. 

the  regular  troops,  and  sent  them  back  to  the  cuhivation  of  the  soil. 

Such  was  the  situation  of  affairs,  when  the  peace  of  Amiens  was 
negociating.  It  was  scarcely  concluded,  when  a  formidable  arma- 
ment disembarked  upon  our  coast  a  numerous  army,  which  took  us 
by  surprise  when  we  supposed  ourselves  in  the  most  perfect  security, 
and  plunged  us  at  once  into  an  abyss  of  calamities. 

Posterity  will  scarcely  believe,  that  in  an  enlightened  and  philan- 
thropic age,  an  enterprize  so  abominable  should  ever  have  taken  place. 
From  amidst  of  an  intelligent  people,  a  swarm  of  barbarians  issued  forth 
with  the  nefarious  design  of  exterminating:  a  civilized  and  unoffending 
naiion.  or  reloading  them  with  the  fetters  of  perpetual  bondage. 

It  was  not  enough  to  come  with  force ;  but,  the  better  to  insure 
success  to  the  expedition,  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  employ  per- 
fidious and  infamous  means :  it  was  necessary  to  sow  dissention  a- 
mongst  us,  in  order  to  produce  a  diversion  in  favour  of  their  de- 
structive projects.  They  neglected  nothing  to  attain  their  execrable 
ends.  The  chiefs,  of  different  colours,  who  were  to  be  found  in 
France,  even  the  sons  of  the  Governor  Louverture  himself,  were 
pressed  into  the  service  for  the  expedition.  They  were,  like 
ourselves,  deceive!  by  that  master  piece  of  perfidy,  the  proclamation 
of  the  first  consul,  in  which  he  told  us,  "  Voii  are  all  equal  and  free 
before  God  and  the  Republic/"  This  was  his  declaration,  at  the 
same  time  that  his  instructions  to  General  lie  Clerc  expressly  enjoin- 
ed the  restoration  of  slavery.  It  was  not  enough  to  call  upon  men  to 
witness  his  falsehood,  but  the  Deity  himself  must  be  insulted  by  this 
horrible  blasphemy.  * 

The  greater  part  of  the  population,  deceived  by  these  fallacious 
promises,  and  long  accustomed  to  consider  themselves  as  French, 
submitted  without  resistance.  So  little  did  the  governor  expect  to 
have  an  enemy  to  combat,  that  he  had  given  no  orders  to  his  generals 
to  resist,  in  case  of  attack  ;  and  when  the  French  armament  arrived, 
he  was  making  the  circuit  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  island.  If  some 
generals  did  resist,  it  was  only  because  the  menacing  and  hostile 
manner  in  which  they  were  summoned  to  surrender,  obliged  them  to 
consult  their  duty,  their  honor,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  tliey 
were  placed. 

[To  prove  these  assertions,  reference  is  made  to  some  official  docu- 
ments, annexed  to  the  manifesto.] 

After  a  resistance  of  some  months,  the  governor-general  yielded  to 


APPENDIX.  259 

the  pressing  entreaties  of  General  Le  Clerc,  and  to  his  solemn  pro- 
testations that  perfect  liberty  was  intended  to  be  rnaintaiiierl,  and  that 
France  would  never  destroy  its  most  beautiful  work.  On  this  basis, 
peace  was  negcciated  with  the  French:  and  the  Governor  Tous- 
saint,  resigning  his  authority,  peaceably  retired  to  the  retreat  which 
he  had  chosen. 

Scarcely  had  the  French  extended  their  dominion  over  the  whole 
island,  and  that  more  by  cunning  and  persuasion  than  by  the  force  of 
arms,  when  they  began  to  put  in  execution  their  horrible  system  of 
slavery  and  destruction. 

To  promote  the  accomplishment  of  their  projects,  a  correspon- 
dence was  fabricated  by  mercenary  and  Machiavelian  scribblers  ;  and 
designs  were  imputed  to  Toussaint  which  he  never  thought  of.  While 
quietly  reposing  in  his  habitation  at  Pongaudin,  in  the  faith  of  solemn 
treaties,  he  was  seized,  loaded  with  fetters,  dragged,  with  his  family, 
on  board  the  Hero,  and  transported  to  France.  All  Europe  knows 
how  he  terminated  his  unfortunate  career  in  the  tortures  and  horrors 
of  the  dungeon  of  the  Chateau  de  Joux,  in  Franche  Comte. 

Such  was  the  recompence  reserved  for  his  attachment  to  France, 
and  for  the  eminent  services  he  had  rendered  to  the  colonies. 

That  moment  was  the  signal  given  for  arrests  throughout  the  island. 
All  those  who  had  displayed  strength  of  intellect,  or  superiority  of 
character,  at  the  time  when  we  claimed  the  rights  of  man,  were  the 
first  to  be  seized.  Even  the  traitors  who  had  most  contributed  to  the 
success  of  the  French  armies,  by  conducting  their  advanced  guards, 
and  pointing  out  their  fellow-citizens  for  vengeance,  were  not  spared. 
At  first,  attempts  were  made  to  sell  them  in  foreign  colonies ;  but  this 
plan  not  succeeding,  it  was  resolved  to  convey  them  to  France,  where 
oppressive  labor,  galleys,  fetters,  and  dungeons,  awaited  them. 

Then  the  white  colonists,  whose  numbers  had  progressively  increased, 
thinking  their  power  sufficiently  restored,  threw  off  the  mask  of  dis- 
simulation, openly  declared  the  re-establishment  of  slavery,  and  acted 
in  conformity  with  that  declaration.  These  men  had  the  impudence 
to  claim,  as  their  slaves,  men  who  had  distinguished  themselves  by 
signal  services  rendered  to  their  country,  as  well  in  a  civil  as  in  a 
military  capacity:  virtuous  and  honorable  magistrates 5  warriors  cover- 
ed with  scars,  whose  blood  had  flowed  in  the  cause  of  France  and 
libeity,  were  again  to  be  subjected  to  the  yoke  of  slavery.  These 
colonists,  scarcely  reinstated  in  their  plantations,  while  their  power 


260  APPENDIX. 

was  yet  hanging  upon  a  thread,  already  marked  out  and  selected  those 
who  were  to  be  the  first  victims  of  their  vengeance. 

Theii  arrived  the  infamous  decree  of  Bo.mparte,  which  confirmpd 
the  re-establishment  of  slavery.  The  better  to  insult  our  misery,  he 
also  employed  towards  us  the  same  dialect  of  delusion  which  he  had 
been  in  the  habit  of  using  towards  the  people  of  Europe.  This  decree 
was  brought  by  a  black  officer,  named  Hercuie,  who  had  sold  himself 
to  Bonaparte. 

The  proud  and  Ubertici de  f<\ct\on  of  the  colonists,  and  dealers  in  hu- 
man flesh,  which,  since  the  commencement  of  the  revolution,  has  pester- 
ed every  successive  government  («f  France  with  plans,  projects,  and  ex- 
travagant and  atrocious  memorials,  all  tending  to  our  destruction;  these 
ftictious  men,  tormented  by  tin  remembrance  of  the  despotism  which 
they  had  exercised  in  Hayti,  agitated  by  a  temj)est  of  different  passions, 
employed  all  the  means  they  could  devise,  to  reseize  the  prey  that  had 
escaped  from  them.  Independents  under  the  Constituent  Assembly; 
Terrorists  under  the  Jacobins;  and,  lastly,  zealous  Bonapartists j 
they  assumed  the  borrowed  mask  of  every  party,  to  obtain  their  coun- 
tenance and  favor.  It  was  tlius  that,  by  their  insiduous  counsels,  they 
urged  Bonaparte  to  undertake  the  unjust  expedition  against  J'.avti. 
It  was  this  faction  which,  after  having  persjialed  him  to  this  metsure, 
furnished  him  with  pecuniary  resources  by  su!)scrii)tii)n  lists  which 
were  opened  at  that  period.  In  a  word,  it  was  this  faction  wSiich 
caused  the  blood  of  our  fellow  coaatryni'^n  to  fl  )vv  in  torrents;  wliich 
instigated  the  unheard  of  tortures  that  we  hive  experienced  ;  tortures 
which  could  be  devised  only  by  c<jlouists  habitu  iteJ  to,  and  hardened 
by,  every  species  of  crime.  It  is  to  the  colonists  that  France  owes 
the  loss  of  a  numerous  army,  which  perished  in  the  plains  and  mo- 
rasses of  Hayti ;  it  is  to  the  n  that  she  owes  the  shame  of  an  enterprize 
which  has  impressed  an  indflible  stain  on  the  name  of  Frenchmen. 

We  are  persuaded,  after  the  cruel  experience  we  have  had  of  the 
spirit  which  animates  these  colonists,  these  traffickers  in  human  fle.sh, 
and  their  vile  sattellites,  that  they  will  again  employ  their  accustomed 
artifices  to  engage  the  French  cabinet  in  a  new  enterprize  against  us. 

If  ever  this  enterprize  take  place,  which  we  can  hardly  believe, 
it  is  to  this  cast,  the  enemies  of  the  human  race,  that  we  shall  be  in- 
debted for  it ;  for  we  are  very  far  from  imputing  to  those  Europeans 
who  are  unacquainted  with  the  colonial  system,  of  which  we  have 
been  the  victims,  the  dreadful  evils  that  we  have  endured.     What 


APPENDIX.  261 

interest  had  the  French  people  in  carrying  the  horrors  of  war  into 
the  heart  of  a  nation  which  was  proul  of  belonging  to  them  ?  What 
interest  had  they  in  coning  to  bury  themselves  in  our  destructive 
climate,  anci  in  beco'uing  the  instruments  and  tools  of  the  colonists, 
to  satiate  their  thirst  for  riches  and  for  vengeance  ? 

However,  the  majority  of  the  peoijle  began  to  take  up  arras  for  the^ 
preserva  ion  of  their  lives  and  liberties.  This  first  movement  alarmed 
the  French,  and  appeared  sufficiently  serious  to  General  Le  Clerc  to 
induce  him  to  convoke  an  extraordinary  assembly  of  the  colonists,  in 
order  to  adopt  the  most  suitable  measures  to  restore  a  better  state  of 
things;  but  these  colonists,  far  from  relaxing  in  their  atrocious  prin- 
ciples, from  the  imperious  sense  of  danger,  unanimously  answered  in 
these  words,  '  No  slavery,  no  C'  lony  ' 

Asa  member  of  this  council,  in  vain  we  raised  our  voice  to  prevent 
the  completion  of  the  ruin  of  our  country  ;  in  vain  we  represented  the 
extreme  injustice  of  replunging  free  men  into  slavery  ;  in  vain,  well 
knowing  the  spirit  of  liberty  wliich  animated  our  countrymen,  we  de- 
nounced this  measure  as  the  only  means  of  ruining  the  country,  and  de- 
taching it  from  France  for  ever.  All  was  to  no  purpose.  Convinced 
that  there  remained  no  hopes  of  reconciliation,  that  we  must  choose  be- 
tween slavery  and  death, — with  arms  in  our  hands,  we  undeceived  our 
fellow-citizens,  who  had  their  eyes  fixed  upon  us ;  and  we  all  unani- 
mously took  up  arms,  resolved  to  expel  the  tyrants  for  ever  from  our 
soil,  or  to  die. 

General  Le  Clcrc  had  already  announced  the  reduction  of  the  isl- 
and, and  had  even  received,  from  almost  all  the  maritime  towns  in 
France  (where  the  advocates  of  the  slave  trade  chiefly  resided),  let- 
ters of  congratulation  on  the  pretended  conquest.  Ashamed  of  having 
given  rise  to  delusive  expectations,  mortified  at  his  inability  to  com- 
plete his  detestable  enterprize,  and  dreading  the  approach  of  a  terrible 
war,  despair  sliortened  his  days,  and  hurried  him  to  the  tomb. 

Among  the  catalogue  of  crimes  which  distinguished  the  administra- 
tion of  General  Le  Clerc,  his  conduct  to  the  Haytian  General  Mau- 
repas,  would  excite  the  indignation  of  any  person  in  the  smallest  de- 
gree susceptible  of  pity  :— Maurepas,  a  man  of  mild  and  gentle  man- 
ners, esteemed  by  his  fellow-citizens  for  his  integrity,  had  been  one 
of  the  first  to  j'>in  the  French,  and  had  rendered  them  the  most  signal 
services;  yet  this  man  was  suddenly  carried  oft'  to  Port  Paix,  and  put 
on  board  the  admiral  s  vessel,  then  at  anchor  in   the  Cape  roads, 


262  APPENDIX. 

where,  after  binding  him  to  the  main-mast,  they,  in  derision,  with 
nails  such  as  are  used  in  ship-building,  fixed  two  old  epaulettes  on  his 
shoulders,  and  an  old  general's  hat  on  his  head.  In  that  frightful 
condition,  these  cannibals,  after  having  glutted  their  savage  mirth, 
precipitated  him,  with  his  wife  and  children,  into  the  sea.  Such  was 
the  fate  of  this  virtuous  and  unfortunate  soldier. 

To  the  command  of  Le  Clerc  succeeded  Rochambeau.  This  mon- 
strous agent  of  Bonaparte,  a  worthy  accomplice  of  the  colonists,  pol- 
luted himself  with  every  species  of  crime  :  he  spared  neither  sex.  nor 
infancy,  nor  age  ;  he  surpassed  iu  cruelty  the  most  accomplished 
villains  of  ancient  or  modern  times.  Gibbets  were  every  where 
erected;  drownings,  burnings,  the  most  horrible  punishments,  were 
practiced  by  his  orders.  He  invented  a  new  machine  of  destruction, 
in  which  victims  of  both  sexes,  heaped  one  upon  another,  were  suffocated 
by  the  smoke  of  sulphur. 

Id  his  insensate  rage,  he  procured  from  Cuba,  at  a  great  expense, 
a  multitude  of  blood-hounds.  They  were  brought  by  a  Frenchman 
named  Noailles,  of  an  illustrious  family,  who  was  the  first  after  the 
revolution  to  betray  his  benefactors  ;  and  the  human  race  was  given 
up  to  be  devoured  by  dogs  that  will  partake  of  the  frightful  immor- 
tality of  their  masters.  What  was  our  crime  }  What  had  we  done  to 
deserve  such  a  proscription  }  Must  our  African  nrisinal  be  our  per- 
petual opprobrium  ?  Must  the  colour  of  our  epidermis  be  the  seal  of 
Qur  eternal  degradation  } 

According  to  an  exact  return  made,  by  order  of  the  government, 
during  the  space  of  twenty-one  months  that  the  French  remained  in 
this  island,  more  than  sixteen  thousand  of  our  fellow-countrymen  pe- 
rished under  the  tortures  we  have  specified.  The  barbarities  com- 
mitted by  these  modern  conquerors  upon  the  children  of  Hayti,  far 
exceeded  the  crimes  of  the  Pizarros,  the  Cortes,  the  Bodavillas,  those 
early  scourges  of  the  new  world. 

In  spite  of  all  their  efforts,  we  have  succeeded  in  expelling  these 
oppressors  from  onr  soil. 

To  secure  ourselves  for  ever  from  the  return  of  such  barbarities  and 
unheard-of  crimes  ;  to  protect  ourselves  from  similar  perfidy  and  in- 
justice, we  resolved  to  cast  off  for  ever  the  yoke  of  foreign  domina- 
tion. Accordingly,  on  the  1st  of  January,  1804,  in  a  general  assem- 
bly of  the  national  representatives,  the  independence  of  Hayti  was 
solemnly  proclaimed,  and  we  pronounced  the  oath  to  die  free  and  in- 


APPENDIX.  263* 

dependent,  and   never  again   to  submit  to  any  foreign  power  what- 
soever. 

Like  other  people,  our  first  years  were  chequered  with  error  and 
trouble;  like  them,  we  passed  through  the  vicissitudes  inseparable 
from  revulutions. 

Since  our  accession  to  the  throne,  our  first  object  has  been  to 
elevate  the  name  and  dignity  of  the  people  of  Hayti.  Convinced  that 
good  faith,  candor,  and  probity  in  our  dealings,  the  inviolability  of 
property,  and  the  personal  rights  of  men,  could  alone  attain  that  end 
in  our  internal  and  external  relations ;  convinced  that  it  is  the  laws 
which  constitutethe  happiness  of  men  united  in  society ;  ourfirstmeasure 
was  to  frame  a  code  of  laws  suitable  to  our  usages,  our  climate,  and 
our  manners.  After  assiduous  application,  with  the  inspiration  and 
assistance  of  the  Almijihty,  we  have  at  length  put  the  finishing  hand 
to  this  ba^is  of  our  social  edifice. 

We  have  constantly  protected  and  encouraged  agriculture  and 
commerce,  which  are  the  channels  of  public  prosperity;  abundant 
harvests  have  crowned  the  toilsome  exertions  of  our  cultivators ;  a 
considerable  quantity  of  produce  has  been  exported  from  our  har- 
bours *iince  wti  proclaimed  our  independence,  and  particularly  in  the 
year  1812,  1813,  and  iSlt,  by  foreign  nations,  who  have  carried  on 
a  traffi"  with  us  t^qnally  safe  and  lucrative. 

Amidst  our  solicitude  to  adopt  every  means  for  reviving  our  inter- 
nal prosperity,  we  have  never  diverted  our  attention  from  the  events 
which  were  passing  in  Europe,  during  the  bloody  struggle  which  she 
has  had  to  sustain,  nor  have  we  ever  lost  sight,  for  one  instant,  of 
Qur  system  of  military  defmce. 

In  this  attitude,  we  waited  till  Bonaparte,  that  enemy  of  the  world, 
should  come  to  attack  us,  with  his  usual  weapons  of  perfidy  and  force ; 
not  forgetting  that,  after  the  peace  of  Amiens,  his  first  object  was 
the  famous  expedition  for  our  extermination. 

But  the  God  of  armies,  who  raises  up  and  casts  down  thrones  at 
his  nod,  has,  in  his  justice,  not  willed  that  this  oppressor  of  nations 
should  accomplish  this  horrible  design.  We  trust  that  his  fall  will 
give  repose  to  the  world  ;  we  hope  that  the  return  of  those  liberal  and 
sound  principles  which  inflience  the  European  powers,  will  cause 
them  to  acknowledge  the  independence  of  a  people  who  ask  only  to 
enjoy  peace  and  commerce,  those  desirable  objects  to  all  civilized 
nations. 


264  APPENDIX. 

It  is  xa  vain  to  attempt  asrain,  by  means  of  force  or  seduction,  to 
make  us  return  under  a  foreign  yoke.  We  are  no  longer  in  danger 
from  the  absurd  system  of  deceiving;  men  in  order  to  govern  them. 
Taught  by  experience,  we  have  come  to  the  knowledge  of  truth,  of 
reason,  and  of  our  own  strength. 

We  ran  no  mi»re  be  the  victims  of  credulity  and  good  faith  ;  we  can 
never  forget  that  an  attem-it  has  once  been  made  upon  our  liberty. 
The  heart-rending  impression  of  the  hnrribl«  torments  which  have 
precipitated  our  fathers,  our  mothers,  our  wives,  our  children,  into 
the  tnmb,  will  never  be  efficed  from  our  memon»s. 

We  are  no  longer  liable  to  deception  :  we  know  the  craft  of  our 
enemies  :  ^e  have  before  our  eyes  the  memoirs  and  the  projects  of 
Mnlouet,  of  Barrdde  Saint  V"enaut,  of  the  Pages  and  the  BruUeys,  and 
other  colonists.  The  political  creed  of  these  dealers  in  human  fle.->h» 
these  counsellors  of  evil,  i>i  well  known  to  u^. 

It  is  comprised  in  two  words,  slavery  and  destruction  !  We  are  not 
ignorant  of  the  criminal  intrigues  and  ^hameful  practices  of  those 
apostles  of  crime  and  falsehood  ;  they  have  taught  us  by  their  wri- 
tings, even  more  than  by  the  tortures  we  have  endured,  that  the  only 
solid  guarantee  of  our  political  rights,  of  our  very  existence,  is  the 
preservation  of  our  independence. 

We  appeal  to  all  the  sovereigns  of  the  world,  to  the  brave  and  loyal 
British  nation,  which  has  been  the  first  to  proclaim,  in  its  august 
senate,  the  abolition  of  the  infamous  traffic  in  negroes  ;  which  has 
employed  the  ascendancy  of  victory  for  the  noble  purpose  of  recom- 
mending the  abolition  to  all  other  states  with  which  she  has  concluded 
alliances  :  we  appeal  to  the  philanthropists  of  all  nations  ;  in  fine  to 
mankind  at  large,  to  the  whole  worM  :  and  we  ask,  what  people, 
after  twenty-five  years  of  battle  and  bloodshed,  having  won  tht^ir 
liberty  and  independence  with  the  sword,  would  consent  to  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  become  again  the  sport  and  the  victims  of  their  cruel 
oppressors  }  What  people  would  stoop  to  such  a  depth  of  baseness  } 
The  last  of  the  Haytians  will  breath  out  his  last  sigh  sooner  than  re- 
nounce his  independence. 

We  will  not  do  any  power  the  injustice  to  suppose  it  capable  of  form- 
ing the  chimerical  h>pe  ofestablishing  its  authority  in  Haytiby  the  force 
of  arms.  The  power  that  should  undertake  this  enterprize,  would 
have  to  march  a  long  way  over  ruins  and  dead  bodies:  and  if,  after 
having  wasted  all  its  means,  and  consumed  the  flower  of  its  troops,  it 


APPENDIX.  265 

dhoald  at  length  make  itself  master  of  the  country,  which  yet  we  be- 
lieve to  be  impossible :  what  wtmld  it  have  gained  by  the  loss  of  so 
much  treasure  and  so  much  blood  * 

It  would  not  be  presumptuous  to  believe,  that  his  majesty,  Louis 
XVIII,  following  the  impulse  of  the  philasthropic  spirit  which  has 
reigned  in  his  family,  and  imitating  the  example  of  his  unfortunate 
brother,  Louis  XVI,  in  his  political  conduct  towards  the  United  States  of 
America,  will  tread  in  the  steps  ©f  that  monarch,  and  acknowledge 
the  independence  of  Hayti.  It  would  be  but  an  act  of  justice,  a  poor 
reparation  for  the  evils  we  have  suffered  from  the  government  of 
France. 

It  is  in  vain  that  our  calumniators  still  have  the  hardihood  to  al- 
lege, that  we  must  not  he  considered  as  a  political  body  aspiring  to 
independence*  and  collectively  occupied  in  the  means  of  attaining  it. 
This  absurd  assertion,  invented  by  the  craft,  wickedness,  and  sordid 
selfishness  of  the  advocates  of  the  slave  trade,  merits  the  profoundest 
contempt  and  indignation  of  good  men  of  all  countries  ;  and  is  suffi- 
ciently belied  by  eleven  years'  actual  enjoyment  of  independence  and 
its  happy  results.  There  is  no  example  of  any  people  having  made 
so  rapid  a  progress  in  civilization. 

Free  by  right,  and  independent,  in  fact,  we  will  never  renounce 
these  blessings ;  no,  never  will  we  consent  to  witness  the  subversion 
of  the  edifice  we  have  raised,  and  cemented  by  our  blood ;  at  least, 
without  being  buried  beneath  its  ruins; 

To  commercial  powers  inclined  to  form  connections  with  us,  we 
offer  our  friendship,  the  security  of  their  property,  and  our  royal  pro- 
tection to  their  peaceable  subjects,  who  shall  land  upon  our  shores 
with  the  intention  of  carrying  on  their  commercial  affairs,  and  who 
shall  conform  to  our  laws  and  customs. 

King  of  a  free  people,  a  soldier  by  profession,  we  dread  no  war, 
nor  enemy.  VVe  have- already  declared  our  determination  not  to  in- 
termeddle, in  any  manner,  in  the  internal  government  of  our  neigh- 
bours :  we  wish  to  enjoy,  at  home,  peace  and  tranquillity,  and  to  ex- 
ercise the  prerogative,  enjoyed  by  all  other  nations,  of  making  such 
law?  for  ourselves  as  our  exigencies  require.  If,  after  the  free  expo- 
sition of  our  sentiments,  and  of  the  justice  of  our  cause,  any  invader, 
in  violation  of  the  laws  of  nations,  should  plant  a  hostile  foot  upon  our 

*  Introduction  to  the  Memoirs  of  St.  Domingo,    Malouet,  vol.  iv.  p.  56. 

36 


266  APPENDIX. 

territory,  our  first  duty  will  then  be  to  repel  the  act  of  aggression  by 
every  means  in  our  power. 

We  solemnly  declare,  thai  we  will  never  become  a  party  to  any 
treaty,  or  any  condition,  that  shall  compromise  the  honour,  the  liber- 
ty, or  the  independence  of  the  Haytian  people.  Faithful  to  our  oath, 
we  will  rather  bury  ourselves  beneath  the  ruins  of  our  country,  than 
suticr  the  smallest  infringement  of  our  political  rights. 

Given  at  our  palace  of  Sans  Souci,  the  18th  of  September,  1814. 
in  the  11th  year  of  independence,  and  the  4th  of  our  reign. 

(Signed)  HENRY. 

(By  the  King) 

Comte  de  Limonade, 
Secretary  of  State,  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs. 


THE    END