INTRODUCTION. 


It has frequently been the fate of striking events, and particularly those which 
have altered the condition of mankind, to be denied that consideration by 
their contemporaries, which they obtain from the veneration of posterity. In 
their vortex, attention is distracted by the effects; and distant society recedes 
from the contemplation of objects that threaten a violation of their system, 
or wound a favourite prejudice. It is thus that history, with all the advantages 
of calm discussion, is imperfect; and philosophy enquires in vain for the un- 
recorded causes of astonishing transactions. 

To remedy the evil in this enlightened æra, the disquisitions of the ob- 
server, and the relations of the traveller occur; but these are perused with the 
rapidity, with which they are necessarily made, and, although they teach us 
what regards our own nature, impress no other sense of the period described, 
than as relates to the fleeting objects of immediate import— furnishing, 
therefore, little more (if so much may always be expected) than frail docu- 
ments for the judgment of the future historian. 

Such is precisely the case with the subject of the following pages. The rise 
of the Haytian empire is an event which may powerfully affect the condition 
of the human race; yet it is viewed as an ordinary succession of triumphs and 
defeats, interrupted only by the horrors of new and terrible inflictions, the 
fury of the contending elements, and destructive disease, more tremendous 
than all. 

It will scarcely be credited in another age, that philosophers heard un- 
moved, of the ascertainment of a brilliant fact, hitherto unknown, or con- 
fined to the vague knowledge of those whose experience is not admitted 
within the pale of historical truth. It will not be believed, that enlightened 
Europe calmly witnessed its contrasted brilliancy with actions which, like the 
opaque view of night, for a sullen hour obscured the dazzling splendour. 

It is on ancient record,* that negroes were capable of repelling their ene- 


ŸLEO AFRICANUS says, that the negroes between Senegal and Gambia, in Africa, (the 
parts from whence slaves are, at present, supplied,) lived in the utmost innocence and 
simplicity, till the armed Moors came among, and subjected them, teaching them after 
wards their religion, and the arts of life. About the fourteenth century, however, Heli 
Ischia, a native-negro, at the head of his countrymen, turning their own arts against them, 


6 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


mies, with vigour, in their own country; and a writer of modern date* has 
assured us of the talents and virtues of these people; but it remained for the 
close of the eighteenth century to realize the scene, from a state of abject de- 
generacy: — to exhibit, a horde of negroes emancipating themselves from the 
vilest slavery, and at once filling the relations of society, enacting laws, and 
commanding armies, in the colonies of Europe. 

The same period has witnessed a great and polished nation,® not merely re- 
turning to the barbarism of the earliest periods, but descending to the char- 
acters of assassins and executioners; and, removing the boundaries which 
civilization had prescribed even to war, rendering it a wild conflict of brutes 
and a midnight massacre. 

To attract a serious attention to circumstances, which constitute an æra 
in the history of human nature and of martial affairs, is the purpose of the 
present disquisition; which, it is hoped, will tend to furnish an awful, yet 
practical lesson, as well as to excite and gratify a laudable curiosity. 

To this subject, the attention of the writer was peculiarly led, from a long 
acquaintance with the West Indies, and opportunities of considerable ob- 
servation of the colonies in that Archipelago. To the French colony of St. 
Domingo, his notice was early and particularly attracted; several of his mili- 
tary friends were afterward employed on its shores, and ultimately an acci- 
dent caused a personal visit; the information resulting from which, on ac- 
count of its subsequent effects, could not fail to be deeply impressed on his 
memory. 

Of Hispaniola, or St. Domingo,’ there is no particular history, in any lan- 
guage, similar to those of the British colonies, so ably executed by Sir HANS 
SLOANE” and others. The earliest accounts are incorporated with the voy- 
age of the great discoverer, his Spanish coadjutors, and the legends of the 
missionaries. Of these the description of coLuMBUs," and that of PETER 
MARTYR,” are the most intelligent, while the account of Las casas’? is par- 
ticularly interesting, and the History of HERRERA“ acute and correct. That 
of VESPUCCI* ought scarcely to be named, in retribution for his injury to 
Columbus. After the establishment of the French colony, when priests from 
the mother-country settled upon the island, they furnished accounts of the 


bravely expelled their Moorish conquerors; This negro continued in power, and acted as 
king, leading them to several foreign wars, and establishing them in power over a great 
extent of Country. [Joannes Leo Africanus (c. 1494-c. 1554) was a Moorish diplomat, trav- 
eler, and author of Descrittione dell’Africa (1550). ] 

“Adanson, Voyage à l'Afrique, 1749-53. [Actually entitled Histoire naturelle du Sénégal 
(1757). Michel Adanson (1727-1806) was a French naturalist who spent several years in 
Senegal. ] 


INTRODUCTION 7 


establishment, and of the manners of its inhabitants, generally interesting 
and correct; the most celebrated of these are by the Fathers DU PERS, CHAR- 
LEVOIX, DU TERTE, and LABAT.” Neither are the accounts of the Buccaniers 
(the first founders of the French colony). by themselves—nor the observa- 
tions of an anonymous writer in the Histoire Générale des Voïages,* without 
merit. From these sources, with the assistance of the able compilation of the 
ABBÉ RAYNAL,” and occasional reference to the most polished of modern 
historians, Dr. ROBERTSON,” the facts with which the present work com- 
mences, are drawn. — For the different light in which some incidents will ap- 
pear, from their authorities, as well as the opinions or sentiments which are 
occasionally interspersed, the writer alone is answerable. 

When the circumstances which ultimately led to the independence of 
the island commenced, the first English work, exclusively, on St. Domingo 
made its appearance; and, though in the form of a pamphlet, contained 
a correct account of facts, with no other fault than an inflammatory style, 
easily imparted by such a subject at the period it was written. Not long after, 
Mr. BRYAN EDWARDS,” who had been successful in a General History of 
the British Colonies in the West Indies, and who had intended to write a 
similar one of the French colonies,* published a quarto volume on the sub- 
ject, comprising all the information he could collect. This work, however, 
although it contained documents of the most authentic kind, did not increase 
Mr. Edwards’s fame as an accurate writer; being, in point of fact, as well as 
topographically, incorrect; it provoked a volume of equal size in answer, from 
a gentleman, who, for many reasons, was well acquainted with his subject; 
M. de CHARMILLY,S the commissioner empowered by a number of the colo- 


“Paris, 1759. [Abbé Prévost (1697-1763) initiated the fifteen-volume Histoire Générale 
des Voyages (1746-1759), though the work was continued by other writers. ] 

tAn Inquiry into the Causes of the Insurrection in St. Domingo, 1792. [Jean-Philippe 
Garran-Coulon, An Inquiry into the Causes of the Insurrection of the Negroes in the Island of 
St. Domingo (1792). De Coulon (1749-1816) was a leading member of the Paris Commune, 
the government of Paris during the French Revolution. ] 

tHist. Survey. Preface. [Bryan Edwards, An Historical Survey of the French Colony in the 
Island of St. Domingo (1797).] 

STo Mr. Edwards he says, (in his “Lettre en Refutation de son Ouvrage sur St. Domingue”) 

“You should have acknowledged, that all your information was derived from others, dur- 
ing a stay of a few weeks only, in a time of general disorder, shut up in the town of the 
Cape; while the inhabitants of the colony, and even the city, were divided into different 
parties; and that you could not speak the French language, or very badly.” 
“TI fallait dire—’ Pendant un séjour de quelques semaines seulement que j'ai demeuré 
enfermé dans la ville du Cap, aussitot après la révolte des nègres en 1791, j'ai rassemblé 
dans un tems de désordre et de troubles, les importans matériaux qui m'ont servi: — ‘que 
vous aviez rien vu par vous-même,” &c. 


8 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


nists to offer a capitulation of St. Domingo to Great Britain. Though replete 
with errors arising from personal interest, and local prejudices, some facts 
are furnished by both these writers which could not be obtained by any other 
means. About the same time, there appeared at Paris, a work in two small vol- 
umes, in the form of Letters, under the name of the “Baron de WIMPFFEN;”?? 
which, from external evidence, appear to be a collection of facts, arranged 
in an agreeable manner, on a subject occupying the attention of the French 
public, at the time. Whether it were or not a real voyage, among a variety of 
observations calculated to suit a temporary purpose, there are some that de- 
serve a much better character. To these were added in France, a short time 
after, a work containing some authentic facts in a memoir of Toussaint, and a 
life of that great man, distorted for the purposes of party, by a popular writer, 
DU BROCAS.” The Remarks of Colonel CHALMERS,” in England, succeeded; 
from whose experience and local opportunities much was to be expected.* 
Of these, with a variety of private documents obtained from an extensive and 
intelligent correspondence, the writer has availed himself, in his third and 
fifth chapters, in a way, he trusts, neither injurious to their authors, nor un- 
acceptable to the public. 

Two other works have arisen out of the subject more recent than the fore- 
going, which deserve to be mentioned: that of M. daRCHENHOLTZ” on the 
Buccaniers, published in Germany; and Mr. DALLAs’s”® English History of the 
Maroons,” furnished from the materials of their superintendant, Mr. Quar- 
rell, of Jamaica. On the former, while it furnishes illustrations of human na- 
ture, little dependence is to be placed in point of historical fact; for it follows 
the Spanish accounts of the people of whom it treats, and conveys an obvious 


M. de Charmilly, at the same time, views the conquest of St. Domingo by the English as 
very easy —ridicules the idea of the blacks ever attaining any force, and hangs the fate of 
the whole of the Antilles on the prosecution of his favorite project. 

“It is amusing to see the confidence with which the subjugation of St. Domingo con- 
stantly inspired its advocates. Col. Chalmers, in other respects, a well-informed soldier 
and gentleman, is incautious enough to have the following assertion in his preface: — “The 
late events in St. Domingo have been much misunderstood, or highly exaggerated: he 
trusts that he has clearly proved that the temporary misfortunes sustained by France were 
occasioned by her impolicy, cruelty, or other causes, totally independent of the power of 
her black enemies, whose strength, as stated, is utterly inadequate to render them inde- 
pendent of that empire, or of any other much less formidable power. If so, it is humiliating 
to hear senators gravely pronounce that France has lost St. Domingo.” The colonel adds, 
from Homer, — 

“To few, and wonderous few, has Heaven assign’d 

“A wise, extensive, all-considering mind!!!” [Pope’s Illiad, bk. 13. Rainsford substitutes 
“Heaven” for “Jove.” ] 


INTRODUCTION 9 


calumny on their most respectable members.” From the latter, some infer- 
ences are to be drawn, applicable to the subject of this volume, though the 
source, enveloped in interest, and the prejudice inseparable from a favourite 
project, is not so pure as could be wished on such an important occasion. 

To the abstracts of these works may be added a variety of temporary pro- 
ductions (including the foreign and English public journals), to which proper 
reference has been had, with the caution necessary for consulting such an 
heterogeneous mass of materials. Thus, no correct or comprehensive ac- 
count, has been given in our language, of this interesting country; even those 
who have enlightened the public mind on other great occasions, falling in 
with the general apathy, have forborne on this wonderful revolution.t 

To supply this omission, in a small degree, the writer, on a former occa- 
sion,+ submitted to the public his ideas in a crude and imperfect state; and 
the attention they received from some intelligent minds, afforded sufficient 
proof, that the public only required to be roused to entertain the consider- 
ations they suggested; while the adoption of his humble narrative in the jour- 
nals of those countriesS that might be supposed to possess the priority of in- 
formation, evinces the necessity of such a communication as the present.| 

In it will be found a succinct, and he trusts candid, view of the early history 
of the Spanish colony, in which the impolicy of cruelty, and the errors of injus- 
tice, are exposed, in preference to any national prejudice, or habit. The same 
ideas are continued, regarding the French establishment; and a reference to 
human nature is preferred, when considering the character of those, whose 
actions of terrific splendour could be tried by no other test. In regard to the 
height of the French colonial prosperity, he has not dilated the account by so 
minute a view of their domestic life as by some might be wished; but, in what 
is necessary to give a correct idea of manners and conduct, it is hoped no de- 
ficiency will appear. In any case where the question of slavery interferes, con- 


*Of the intrepid, generous, and intelligent Morgan (among others), M. d’Archenholtz 
asserts, “The horrors he committed are more dreadful than those of any of his colleagues. 
This monster filled the highest posts in the (British) state, and enjoyed with perfect secu- 
rity that enormous wealth which had cost the tears and blood of so many victims to his 
avarice, without suffering the smallest remorse to approach his hardened heart!” [Sir 
Henry Morgan (c.1635-1688) was a famously fearsome privateer. ] 

TFrom this censure, however, must be excepted Mr. Cobbett, (the author of the Political 
Register) who has in more than this instance deserved the character he has obtained of an 
enlightened politician. [William Cobbett (1763-1835), famous pamphleteer and advocate 
for Parliamentary Reform. ] 

TIn the winter of 1801-2. 

SSee “The Merchant,” a respectable paper published in Rotterdam in the beginning of 
1802, &c. &c. 

|lSee also “The Monthly” and other Reviews of this period. 


10 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


sidering the subject on a broad basis, without regard to party, he has shewn 
its general inexpediency, rather than scrutinized its measures. And in tracing 
the revolutionary spirit to its source, he has endeavoured to point out moral 
delinquency without any other expression of rigidity than that which arose 
from the subject itself. In contemporary history, that hazardous, and perhaps 
invidious enterprize, he has rather adopted those facts, wherever such could 
be found, which have already received the common consent, than obtruded 
his own, in their place; and where the latter are of necessity introduced, they 
have been scrupulously examined and confirmed. His own sojourn at Cape 
François and Fort Dauphin is the unaffected tale of a way-worn soldier,” ex- 
perienced in the cross-roads of life, equally happy in the hospitality of an 
Indian cottage, or that of a magnificent empire — yet not regardless of each 
exclusive excellence, nor appropriating that of the one, to the other, or deny- 
ing either. With regard to the transactions of the Black Republic (the appel- 
lation first given to the black government by the author), great care has been 
used to obtain the medium of truth between a variety of conflicting accounts; 
and, for the better comprehending their direct intent and views, much atten- 
tion has been paid to give in the translation of their public papers, their origi- 
nal spirit. 

Of one prominent subject of the present volume, it is painful to speak—yet 
an application to the general reader is necessary, as well as an apology to the 
sensibility of that sex, which the author would be much afflicted to forego — 
for the representations of cruelty, which will, he trusts, prevent such another 
violation of the human character. He is also desirous to avoid the appearance 
of enlarging on a subject which regards a country against whom his own is in 
hostilities. It must, therefore, be recollected, that it was during the peace?’ 
which afforded an opportunity for the commission of crimes against human 
nature, of which he complains, that he first attacked the expedition against 
St. Domingo, and the immediate recourse to the assistance of the ferocious 
animals, which were surpassed by the cruelty of those, by whom they were 
employed. Mere description conveys not with so much force as when ac- 
companied by graphic illustration, those horrors which are wished to be im- 
pressed upon the public mind. The existence of blood-hounds in the Spanish 
settlements in America, though disgraceful to the nation by which it is per- 
mitted, may yet continue, without any effect more extensive than with regard 
to the colonists, or their visitants; but the practice of, and terrible reference 
to, the savage custom of a barbarous age (only employed exclusively against 


“The writer, at the time of his first publication, had been twenty-four years an officer in 
his Majesty’s service. 


INTRODUCTION 11 


the worst criminals) in a European army, is a subject of the most alarming 
kind. That every public exhibition of even the forms of cruelty is productive 
of dangerous effects on the human mind, cannot be denied, and should be 
avoided; what then must be the callous insensibility produced on a soldier 
by circumstances such as are here delineated? It is reducing the heroism of 
war to a base contrivance of death. This cautionary memorial records the first 
step; it is for the public only, by marking it with a general sentiment of detes- 
tation, to preclude another and more dreadful, because more extensive, em- 
ployment of the means. Such measures increase upon those who adopt them 
by insensible gradations, and once admitted, may extend even beyond their 
own intentions. The modern art of war is already removed to a sufficient dis- 
tance from the magnanimity of ancient combat. Let not the breach be ren- 
dered wider by adoptions such as these. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP. I. 


A SUCCINCT historical View of the Colonies of Hispaniola and St. Domingo, 
from the Discovery of Hayti, by Columbus, to the Height of their 
Prosperity in 1789 15-69 


CHAP. II. 
Origin of the Revolutionary Spirit of this Period in 
St. Domingo 69-77 


CHAP. III. 


Account of the Progress and Accomplishment of the Independence 
of St. Domingo 77-132 


CHAP. IV. 
State of Manners on the Independence of the Blacks in St. Domingo, 
with a Memoir of the Circumstances of the Author’s Visit to 
the Island in 1799 132-148 


CHAP. V. 


View of the Black Army, and of the War between the French Republic and 
the independent Blacks of St. Domingo 148-216 


CHAP. VI. 


On the Establishment of a Black Empire, and the probable Effects of 


the Colonial Revolution 216-218 


APPENDIX. 

No. 1. Letter of the Abbé Grégoire to the Citizens of Colour in 
the French West Indies 221 

11. Principles of the First General Assembly of 
St. Domingo 226 

111. Dying Testimony of Ogé against the Insurgents 229 

Iv. Terms of Capitulation proposed by the Inhabitants of 
Grand Anse, &c. to Major-General Williamson 232 

v. Honorable Dispatch of Chevalier De Sevré to Colonel 
Whitlock 234 

vi. Account of M. de Charmilly 235 


vii. Documents illustrative of the Character and Manners 
of Toussaint L’Ouverture 238 

vill. Extract from the Authors former Work 243 

1x. First Colonial Regulation of the Captain-General 
Le Clerc 247 

x. An account of the Nature and History of the Blood-hounds 
used in the American Colonies 251 


x1. First colonial Regulation issued during the Government of 
Rochambeau 256 


x11. Documents respecting the Evacuation of St. Domingo by 
the French Army under Rochambeau 256 


XIII. Declaration of the Independence of the Blacks of 
St. Domingo 260 

XIV. Proclamation for a solemn Abjuration of the French 
Nation 262 

xv. Communication of the Intentions of the Black 
Government on the Appointment of a Governor-General 
for Life 264 

Xvi. Caution to the Spaniards 267 

XVII. Programa issued on the Coronation of the first Emperor 
of Hayti 268 

XVIII. Statement of the Black Force at the Revolution 270 


xix. Additional Remarks 271 


A SUCCINCT HISTORICAL 
VIEW OF ST. DOMINGO. 


CHAP. I. 
From the Period of its Discovery, by Columbus, to its highest 
State of Prosperity in 1789. 


HAYTI, Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, the largest and most valuable of the West 
India Islands, is situated in the Atlantic ocean, between the island of Puerto 
Rico on the east, and Jamaica and Cuba on the west; a small part of the rocks 
and shelves which form the Bahama islands lie at no great distance to the 
north; and it is bounded on the south by the Caribbean sea, and ultimately by 
the continent of South America. It lies in the latitude of 18 deg. 20 min. north, 
and in 68 deg. 40 min. west longitude from Greenwich.” It is in length, ac- 
cording to the best accounts, more than 450 miles from east to west, and 150 
in breadth.5! 

This beautiful island was the sixth discovered by the enterprising and un- 
fortunate Columbus in his progress towards the discovery of a new world, 
of the honor of which, in the appropriation of a name, he was to be deprived 
by the caprice of his contemporaries, in favor of an obscure adventurer, of 
no other merit in the discovery, than that of having trodden in his steps.” It 
was the first on which he formed a settlement, or made any stay in his first 
voyage, and appears to have afterwards received the principal marks of his 
consideration. To it he was directed by the natives of Cuba, where he had 
previously landed, as more rich in its mines of that fertile ore with which it 
was necessary to bribe the avarice of the Spaniards, to prolong that ardour of 
discovery which it had cost him so much labour to excite. 

Columbus first arrived at Hayti, for so this country was called by its natives, 
on the 6th day of December, 1492. He landed at a small bay, which he called 
St. Nicholas, and then named the island Espagnola, in honor of the country 


“When the prosecution of discoveries in Spain had fallen into the hands of private ad- 
venturers, Alonzo de Ojeda, who had accompanied Columbus in his second voyage, was 
among the first to propose an expedition under his own command. With this active and 
gallant officer sailed Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine gentleman, apparently of no osten- 
sible character whatever; but having framed a fraudulent narrative of his voyage with some 
elegance, which formed the first description of any part of the new world, he obtained 
from its circulation the honor of giving name to America. 


com 


mene 
G. OF GON AINE 3 em 
— 


Prati at de tt 


Map of St. Domingo. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and 
Manuscripts, Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University 
Libraries. 


“ISLAND or S” DOMINGO. les 


Rp Ps i ste 


* ~~ 


VAL 


ve dv, Late © lg tm Pa lan en de Porn ne 


18 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


by whose king he was employed: from thence he sailed along the northern 
coast till he found a more convenient harbour, which he named Concep- 
tion, and where he first had access to the inhabitants, through the means of 
a female whom his people overtook, and prepossessed in their favor, by the 
usual means of trifling presents and gentle behaviour. 

It is our wish to pursue in this place a sober narrative of fact, rather than to 
give loose to the fascinations of romantic description, or else the early Span- 
ish writers have handed down such accounts of the aborigines of Cuba, His- 
paniola, and Jamaica, as would warrant the most extravagant eulogy on their 
personal appearance, manners, and ingenuity. It may, however, naturally be 
supposed possessing the necessaries of life without labour, on a soil the most 
fertile, and in a benignant climate, in a state of the utmost simplicity, and 
consequently free from the general enemies to beauty, they would have per- 
sonal advantages not to be expected in their descendants under the combined 
evils of slavery in a voluptuous state. Even the rigidity of history has been 
softened into the most pleasing descriptions of them: “They appeared,” says 
Robertson,” “in the simple innocence of nature, entirely naked, their black 
hair, long and uncurled, floated upon their shoulders, or was bound in tresses 
around their heads. —They had no beards, and every part of their bodies was 
perfectly smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky copper colour; their fea- 
tures singular, rather than disagreeable; their aspect gentle and timid; though 
not tall, they were well shaped and active.” “The industry and ingenuity of this 
race,’ says another elegant writer, “must have exceeded the measure of their 
wants. Placed in a medium between savage life, properly so called, and the 
refinement of polished society, they were perhaps equally exempt from the 
bodily distresses and sanguinary passions of the former conditions, and from 
the artificial necessities and solicitudes of the latter.” They were unquestion- 
ably the most unoffending, gentle, and benevolent of the human race.t 

That there were some grounds for a belief in the ingenuity ascribed to them 
by Peter Martyr? and others, as far as it related to their simple agriculture, 
and some progress in the arts of ornament as well as utility, may, perhaps, be 
proved by a fact of another nature which tends to illustrate the character of 
this people, while it may afford a lesson to our own times; —would that we 
could not say to our own country. 

When, among the numerous disasters of Columbus, he was wrecked on the 
eastern coast of the island, and if he had before impressed the natives with 
admiration of the superior nature of their visitors, was now placed in a situa- 


*Hist. of America, vol. i. 1. 2. 
THist. Jamaica, Dallas’s Hist. vol. i. 23. 
De Rebus Oceanis, &c. 


CHAPTER I 19 


tion the best calculated to prove their natural equality, and even to tempt by 
an unlucky opportunity any inclination to their injury, instead of the smallest 
hostility. Guacanahari, the cazique, or king of this division of their island, of 
which it appeared to be governed by seven, having been informed of his mis- 
fortune, expressed great grief for his loss, and immediately sent aboard all 
the people in the place in many large canoes; they soon unloaded the ship of 
every thing that was upon deck, as the king gave them great assistance: “He 
himself,” says Columbus, who records it, “with his brothers and relations, 
took all possible care that every thing should be properly done both aboard 
and on shore; and from time to time he sent some of his relations weeping, to 
beg of me not to be dejected, for he would give me all that he had. I can assure 
your Highnesses,” he adds, “that so much care would not have been taken of 
securing our effects in any part of Spain; as all our property was put together 
in one place near his palace, until the houses which he wanted to prepare 
for the custody of it were emptied; he immediately placed a guard of armed 
men, who watched during the whole night, and those on shore lamented as 
much as if they had been interested in our loss.* They are supposed to have 
migrated originally from the neighbouring continent, and are ascribed by Sir 
Walter Raleigh to the Arrowauk™ tribe of Guiana.t 

Thus far we have preserved the necessary sobriety in collecting a descrip- 
tion of the first inhabitants of St. Domingo; but when we come to speak of the 
territory itself, this caution ceases, for, no description that we have yet seen 
is adequate to the appearance, even at the present day, of a country which re- 
quires all the aid of romance to imagine, much less to describe. — Of fertility, 
which it requires but the fostering hand of man to guide to all the purposes 
of life, and of a climate the most salubrious among the Antilles, and in which 
longevity is general. — “In these delightful countries too,” observes Robertson, 
“Nature seemed to assume another form; every tree and plant, and animal, 


3 


was different from those of the ancient hemisphere;”**?— Columbus boasted 


of having discovered the original seat of Paradise. —“In these delightful vales,” 
exclaims the Abbé Raynal,* “all the sweets of spring are enjoyed, without 
either winter or summer. There are but two seasons in the year, and they are 


“Letter of Columbus to Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain. See his Life in Churchill’ s Voy- 
ages, as written by his younger son Ferdinand, an ecclesiastic, and founder of the Colum- 
bine Library at Seville; also Herrera’s General History. [Awnsham Churchill (1658-1728) 
was a leading London publisher. His most famous work was A Collection of Voyages (1704). ] 

TRaleigh’s Voyages. [Sir Walter Raleigh (c.1552-1618) was an aristocrat, poet, and ex- 
plorer who twice attempted to establish a colony at Roanoke, Virginia. He later turned his 
attention to Venezuela and Guyana in search of the legendary El Dorado and recorded his 
voyage in The Discovery of Guiana (1596), the book Rainsford seems to be referring to here.] 

East and West Indies, vol.iv. 231 [Raynal, A Philosophical and Political History]. 


20 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


equally fine. The ground always laden with fruit, and covered with flowers, 
realizes the delights and riches of poetical descriptions. Wherever we turn 
our eyes, we are enchanted with a variety of objects, coloured and reflected 
by the clearest light. The air is temperate in the day time, and the nights are 
constantly cool.” — “In a country of such magnitude,” says Edwards, * “diversi- 
fied with plains of vast extent, and mountains of prodigious height, is prob- 
ably to be found every species of soil which nature has assigned to all the 
tropical parts of the earth. In general it is fertile in the highest degree, every 
where well watered, and producing almost every variety of vegetable nature 
and beauty for use, for food, and luxury, which the lavish hand of a bountiful 
providence has bestowed on the richest portion of the globe.” “The posses- 
sions of France in this noble island,” he continues, “were considered as the 
garden of the West Indies, and for beautiful scenery, richness of soil, salu- 
brity, and variety of climate, might justly be deemed the paradise of the new 
world.” — “What you have said,” replies De Charmilly,t animadverting on the 
preceding passage, “is nothing when it is known that the extent of the French 
part is but one half of that of the Spanish division, and that this is yet more 
fertile than the French part, requiring only cultivators, &c Of even such an 
account, when contemplating the various parts of St. Domingo in which we 
have been, with an eye well accustomed to tropical scenery, and satiated with 
the luxury natural to its soil, we could be almost inclined to say too, this is 
nothing. 

It is not to be wondered at, that the inhabitants should consider the Span- 
iards, on their first interview, as preternatural beings, a circumstance, how- 
ever, very favorable to their intercourse, and which might have been turned 
to more advantage in a better purpose than that to which it was applied. They 
possessed gold, which they found in the beds of the rivers, or washed by the 
heavy rains from the mountains, and which they gladly exchanged for bells, 
beads, or pins. A prince, or cazique of the country, who visited Columbus, was 
carried in a sort of seat upon men’s shoulders, and derived great respect from 
his attendants. He was extremely courteous, and presented the admiral with 
many articles of curious workmanship, and received with complacency some 
trifles in return. 

They had no idea of the imaginary value attributed by their visitors to gold, 
and readily pointed out the mountains, which yet retain their original name 
of Cibao,** as the great repository of the ore they so much desired. 

It was at this period that Columbus lost one of his ships through the care- 


“Historical Survey, chap. 19. 
TLettre à M. Edwards, p. 70. 


CHAPTERI 21 


lessness of a pilot, and experienced the tenderness which has been already 
mentioned. Of another of his vessels out of three, he had procured no intel- 
ligence since his arrival, and suspected some treachery in the captain who 
commanded it. The third was of course insufficient to receive the whole of 
his crew, and he was desirous to return to Spain. The simplicity of the natives, 
and their terror from the incursions of the people who inhabited several 
islands to the south east, whom they called Caribbeans,* and who were of a 
very opposite character to themselves, being fierce and warlike, and devour- 
ing the flesh of their prisoners, gave confidence to Columbus, in the propo- 
sition of leaving a part of his crew behind, which would embrace the two ad- 
vantages of forming a settlement on the island, and enable him to return to 
Spain immediately. They agreed without a murmur, and even assisted in the 
erection of a fort which was to be afterwards used as a means of their own 
subjection. 

Thirty-eight Spaniards were appointed to remain on the island, under the 
command of Diego de Arado,” a gentleman of Cordova, to whom Columbus 
communicated his own powers, and every thing requisite for their establish- 
ment; having first endeavoured very successfully to impress the natives in 
their behalf, by acts of beneficence and exhibitions of power. He promised to 
revisit them soon, and in the interim to make respectable mention of them to 
their country. Columbus left the little colony on the 4th of January 1493, and 
arrived in Spain in the month of March following. 

The departure of Columbus had not long taken place, when, as too often 
happens, the garrison he had left behind grew impatient of restraint, and 
threw off the command of their newly appointed governor. Regardless of the 
prudent instructions which had been given them, the men who composed it 
became insolently independent, and gratified their avaricious and licentious 
desires at the expence of the natives, making a wasteful prey of their gold, 
their women, and their provisions; thus, instead of supporting the estima- 
tion in which they were held; exhibiting themselves as the most depraved of 
human beings. At length the cazique of Cibao,** whose country the Spaniards 
chiefly infested, cut offa part of the colonists, surrounded the remainder, and 
destroyed their fort. 

Columbus having employed himself for six months at the court of Spain in 


*M. de Charmilly constantly confounds the character of the inoffensive aborigines of 
St. Domingo, with that of the Charaibs, or Cannibals, and of the African negroes in their 
present state of slavery, and thence draws deductions, which must consequently fall to the 
ground. [Many early European explorers viewed the Caribs as cannibals. The English term 
“cannibal” in fact derives from the native word “caribe,” signifying “brave or daring” (OED ). 
There is no evidence that the Caribs ate humans. | 


22 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


receiving the rewards of his distresses, and in interesting it in behalf of the 
splendid enterprize of which he was the author, no sooner accomplished his 
aim, and procured a sufficient fleet, under the papal sanction, on the part 
of the king of Spain, than he became impatient to revisit his colony. He ac- 
cordingly departed on his second voyage, and after touching at several other 
islands towards the north west of his route, arrived at Hispaniola on the 22d 
of November following. 

His surprize may easily be conceived to find that his colony no longer 
existed; and while the Spaniards in dismay were weeping over the fate of 
their countrymen, a brother of the friendly cazique Guacanahari arrived, and 
related to him the account of their fate. 

Instead of wasting his time by a retaliation of injuries, Columbus set about 
the erection of a town, of which he traced the site in a large plain, near a spa- 
cious bay. He obliged every person in his suite, of whatever quality, to assist in 
a work so necessary to the common safety. This City, the first which obtained 
that appellation in the new world, was named Isabella,?” in honor of his pa- 
troness the queen of Castile. 

Columbus experienced all the difficulties attendant on an infant colony, 
and a timely excursion in great pomp to the mountains of Cibao, which they 
found to answer the description of the Indians, in the possession of gold in 
considerable quantities, perhaps only saved the establishment from final 
ruin. As soon as concord was restored by the prospect of the mines, Colum- 
bus again purposed to leave his colony for the prosecution of new discover- 
ies. He appointed his brother Diego,** with a council of officers, to govern in 
his absence; and a body of soldiers, under the command of Don Pedro Mar- 
garita,’ were sent to visit the different parts of the island, and to establish 
the authority of the Spaniards. He then set sail on the 24th of April, but after 
an absence of five months, during which time he had not been distant many 
leagues, and had experienced the most disastrous circumstances, he returned 
almost dead to the colony, where he found a brother Bartholomew,*° whom 
he had not seen for thirteen years, who had arrived in his absence, and whose 
unexpected appearance, after sustaining distresses scarcely inferior to his 
own, so much revived his spirits as to produce a speedy convalescence.” 


*Bartholomew Columbus had been dispatched by the great navigator to England, to 
negociate with Henry VII. his project of discoveries, in case he should be disappointed 
in Spain, as he had been in Portugal. On his voyage, the negociator fell into the hands of 
pirates, who stripped him, and retained him several years a prisoner. At length, having 
escaped, he arrived in London, but in such poverty, that he was incapable of appearing at 
court on his mission, till, by drawing maps for sale, in the execution of which he was very 
ingenious, he procured decent clothing, and a moderate subsistence. 


CHAPTERI 23 


During the absence of Columbus, the soldiery under Margarita had re- 
peated the conduct of the first colony, while the necessities even of abste- 
mious Spaniards rendered them unwelcome neighbours to a race who, re- 
quiring very little food to support a life of indolence and innocence, made 
but proportional provisions when any care was necessary. Maize, with a few 
vegetables, and very little, if any animal food, formed their only necessary 
stock, and on this a body of men fortifying themselves in towns, must have 
made a formidable inroad. Famine, and the success of their former revolt, 
with long repeated grievance, at length provoked other attempts to rid them- 
selves of the burthen, and Columbus was compelled to have recourse to arms, 
which he had hitherto with much solicitude avoided. The Indians were de- 
feated by their precipitance: instead of the mode natural to them, of draw- 
ing the enemy into their fortresses, they rushed into an open plain, the Vega 
Real, and numbers being thrown into consternation by the first appearance of 
European warfare, the impetuosity of cavalry, (which they conceived, like the 
Thessalonians, to be Centaurs,) and the fierce onset of the dogs,” they yielded 
to Columbus an easy victory; and those who were not taken prisoners, and 
reduced to servitude, resigned themselves entirely to despair. Such was the 
disparity of power, that though near an hundred thousand Indians took the 
field with missile weapons of their rude fashion, the victory was obtained by 
two hundred foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs, which formed the 
whole disposable force of the Spaniards. 

Columbus employed several months in passing through the island to com- 
plete its subjection, and impose a tribute on all the natives above the age 
of fourteen, which was one of the first effects of a policy adopted against 
his own inclination to gratify the avarice of the Spanish court, at which he 
was attempted to be undermined, and which proved afterwards, however 
moderately used by himself, a means of tyranny and cruelty in the hands of 
others. This taxation was an insurmountable infringement on the habits of 
the Indians, to whom restraint on labour was an intolerable evil. It induced 
an attempt at another kind of hostility, that of starving the appetites of the 
Spaniards, on the gratification of whose voracity they conceived so much to 
depend. They pulled up the roots, and suspended all their simple agricultural 
operations, and retiring to inaccessible mountains, they produced in them- 
selves the effects they vainly hoped to produce in their usurpers. Few as were 
their wants, they were soon totally unsupplied, and more than a third part 
became victims to their self-created famine. 


*Of the mode of introducing these combatants into Spanish tactics, some account will 
be found in a future chapter. [See section X of the appendix. ] 


24 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


It was at this time that divisions began to be created in the island through the 
intrigues of the enemies of Columbus in Spain; they procured one Aguado," 
a groom of the bed-chamber, to be sent as commissioner to Hispaniola, who 
displayed all the insolence of mean minds disordered by sudden elevation. 
To relieve himself, and obtain an explanation with his enemies before his 
monarch, Columbus returned to Spain, leaving his brother Bartholomew as 
adelantado, or lieutenant-governor, and through a misplaced trust, appoint- 
ing Francis Roldan, a gentleman of rank and character, chief justice. 

Though as usual experiencing difficulties in his passage, he so far gained 
over Ferdinand and Isabella, as to obtain further provisions for his colony, in 
a digested plan, and on a more permanent and extensive scale. Women, arti- 
ficers, and husbandmen, were joined to the new expedition, but, as all his ac- 
quisitions received some alloy, to these were unadvisedly added the criminals 
from the jails, that fatal resource for population which has so often miscar- 
ried. It was almost two years, however, before Columbus set out on his third 
voyage, and several months after before he returned to Hispaniola, having in 
the interim discovered the continent of America,” the crown of all his enter- 
prizes, and of all his sorrows. He returned weary and sick, but he found the 
colony in a state that admitted of no repose. 

Don Diego Columbus had, at the desire of his brother, during his absence, 
removed the colony to a more eligible station on the opposite side of the 
island, where he had founded a city, which he dedicated to St. Domingo, or 
Dominica, in honor of the name of his father, and which remained so long the 
seat of Spanish dominion in the new world.‘ 

Restless spirits will sometimes be found, however inconsistently, in the 
highest stations, and political troubles arise from very unexpected sources; 
such was the case with Roldan, whose appointment was to have preserved 
peace and order; and, when Diego had reduced to subjection what remained 
of the island unsubdued by his brother, this man excited rebellion among his 
countrymen, and even the Indians, with such artifices, as caused the most 
alarming effects, and was only quelled by the temperate, conciliatory, and 
expedient policy of Columbus. Of the bad consequences of this restoration 
of tranquillity, however, was the re-establishment of Roldan, and a conces- 
sion to the avarice of the Spaniards, which was the first step in reducing the 
Indians to actual slavery. Lands being allotted to the mutineers in different 
parts of the island, the Indians of the district were appointed, in lieu of their 
tribute, to cultivate a certain portion of ground for the use of their new mas- 
ters, from the characters of many of whom may be easily derived the origin of 
numberless calamities to that unhappy people. 

Of the mutiny, the effects were by no means terminated in appearances, 


CHAPTERI 25 


the progress of discovery was stopped, and such false representations were 
made by his opponents, that a knight of Calatravia, called Francis de Bova- 
dillo,** was sent to supersede Columbus, and by means known only to courts, 
to send him immediately a criminal in chains to Spain. Thus closed the fif- 
teenth century in St. Domingo, a period which, while it saw the founder of 
an empire disgraced and wretched, afforded a better prospect to the colony 
than had hitherto appeared. Such provisions had been made for working the 
mines, and cultivating the country, as assured not only its existence, but a 
considerable revenue to the monarch, who suffered Columbus to be circum- 
vented and abused. 

Bovadillo proceeded, as might be expected, to render himself popular, by 
gratifying the entire inclinations of his countrymen. He numbered all the re- 
maining Indians, and dividing them into classes, distributed them as prop- 
erty among the Spaniards, who, disregarding the only true means of obtaining 
wealth by agriculture, sent them to the mines, and imposed on them such a 
disproportioned labour as threatened their utter and speedy extinction. 

To prevent this dreadful event, and preserve the shew of decency to the 
world, on the arrival of Columbus in Spain, and his appeal to the justice of 
Ferdinand, another knight of the military order of Alcantara, Nicholas de 
Ovando,” was sent to replace Bovadillo. Regulations were adopted to prevent 
the licentious spirit which had arisen in the colony under his government; 
and, to check the inordinate progress of wealth, the gold was ordered to be all 
brought to a smelting-house, where one half should become the property of 
the crown. Columbus remained in Spain many months soliciting attention in 
vain, till his proposition of an attempt at discoveries to the east was accepted; 
and he sat out on his fourth voyage in May, 1502. 

Ovando brought to St. Domingo the most respectable armament hitherto 
seen in the new world, consisting of thirty-two ships, with two thousand 
five hundred settlers.# On his arrival, Bovadillo, with Roldan and his accom- 
plices, were ordered to return to Spain. 

Columbus having experienced some inconvenience from one of his vessels, 
altered the course in which he steered, and bore away for St. Domingo, with 
a hope of exchanging it for some ship of Ovando’s fleet; eighteen of which, 
however, he found laden, and preparing to depart for Spain. He requested 
permission to enter the harbour, (first acquainting Ovando with his destina- 
tion,) that he might negotiate an exchange, and avoid a violent hurricane that 
he saw approaching, and which he advised the departing fleet also to avoid. To 
neither of these objects did he obtain an acquiescence. He, however, took pre- 
cautions against the tempest, and saved himself, while nearly the whole of the 
eighteen ships of his enemies were lost. In them perished Bovadillo, Roldan, 


26 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


and the greater part of those who had persecuted Columbus and the Indians, 
with the whole of their ill-gotten wealth, amounting in worth to upwards of 
fifty thousand pounds sterling; a sum at that time equal to many multiplica- 
tions of its value at present. 

Columbus did not long remain on the inhospitable shore of a country to 
which he was refused access, by those who owed to him entirely its posses- 
sion, but prosecuted his voyage in the fruitless hope of discovering the Indian 
ocean. 

In the mean time Ovando, who had received a commission more favor- 
able to humanity than his predecessors, relieved the Indians from compul- 
sory toil, and the colony, though retarded by deficiency of labourers, began 
to advance in its approaches to a regular society; but, alas! in no instance is 
the constant variance between justice and expedience in what is called the 
social state to be more regretted than in the present. The Spaniards became 
incapable, without the assistance of the inhabitants, (which no inducement 
could procure) to cultivate the soil, or to work the mines, and many of the 
new settlers died of disorders incident to the climate, not yet understood, 
while others quitted the island when deprived of their slaves. These circum- 
stances demanded some attention, and the consequence once more returned 
to the unoffending Indians. 

Columbus, persevering through misfortune, this year again paid a visit to 
his favorite isle, after having been not only unsuccessful in his attempt at 
farther discoveries, but a sufferer by complete shipwreck, and detained near 
twelve months in the island of Jamaica, which he had discovered nine years 
before, but of which no farther notice had been taken.*” Ovando appears to 
have been cautious of admitting into the country, under his government, a 
man of such vast powers, and to whom belonged, by the most determinate of 
all rules, the dominion of a world he had found: he at length, however, fur- 
nished the means for his escape, and received him with every public honor 
on his arrival at St. Domingo. 

He remained only a month upon the island; with his usual ill-fortune, en- 
countering violent storms, sailed seven hundred leagues with jury-masts on 
his way to Spain, where, exhausted by his sufferings, and disgusted with the 
dissimulation and injustice of a monarch whose reign he had immortalized, 
he died fifteen months after,” aged fifty-nine years. It is useless to lament in 
this place the melancholy end of a man whose memory is eternized. The rec- 
ollection of it rather communicates a balm to the sorrows of inferior multi- 
tudes; and the details of history will apply the event with advantage to the 
instruction of future ages. 


“On the 2oth of May, 1506. 


CHAPTERI 27 


A few months before Columbus, died his patroness Isabella; so that a 
powerful influence was withdrawn from the interests of humanity, as they 
regarded the new world; and as Ovando began to experience the ill effects of 
a liberal conduct, he began also to relax in the execution of the royal edicts. 
He made a new distribution of the Indians among the Spaniards, with the 
difference only, that they were to be paid for their labour, reduced the royal 
share of the gold to one third, and afterwards to a fifth part; for which he ob- 
tained, (with better success than Columbus,) the sanction of the court. 

Notwithstanding the apparent mildness of the present governor, it was at 
this period that the rage for cruelties commenced which have stained the 
page of history with more horrors than can be conceived by those possess- 
ing even an ordinary love for the species. No treachery was too gross, no 
violation of sex or dignity too painful for this unhappy people in the hands 
of the Spaniards; all regulations tending to mitigate the rigour of their servi- 
tude were forgotten, while their labour was increased. Ferdinand conferred 
grants of them as rewards to his courtiers, who farmed them out, being no 
longer treated or considered but as animals of an inferior species, of no other 
use than as instruments of wealth, and I could almost say, subjects of oppres- 
sion. At their expence, however, the colony increased in riches and in con- 
sequence; for with such rapidity and success were the mines explored, that 
for several years the gold brought into the royal smelting-house, amounted in 
value to more than half a million sterling, (according to the present standard 
of money). Sudden fortunes arose among private persons, which tempted 
others to embrace the opportunity of enriching themselves both at the ex- 
pence of health and reason; and the effect was for a time highly advanta- 
geous to the colonists, and to the government of the mother country. Like the 
progress of a conflagration, however, the blaze was short in proportion to its 
extent. The same exertions which exhausted the unhappy Indians enriched 
the Spaniards, both as related to the nature of the operations, and to the gov- 
ernment of Ovando, who is described to have introduced much wisdom and 
justice into his jurisdiction over his countrymen, but a proportionate rigour 
towards the original inhabitants of the country. 

Ovando first gave a permanence to the laws he had established by execut- 
ing them impartially, the only means of procuring regard for any establish- 
ment. He seems also to have attended to every object of advantage to the 
colony, and, among others, endeavoured to turn the attention of some of the 
Spaniards to the more laudable pursuits of agriculture. Having obtained from 
the Canary Islands some slips of the sugar-cane, which throve exceedingly, 
he tempted them to form plantations, and to erect sugar-works, which fortu- 
nately became an important support when the bowels of the earth were ex- 
hausted.*® The conduct and success of Ovando soon apprized Ferdinand of 


28 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the value of those discoveries, he had hitherto appeared to depreciate, and 
on the author of which he had conferred only disgrace and misery; he ac- 
cordingly set about forming commercial and ecclesiastical regulations, and 
at length established a system of policy the most profound, and every way 
calculated to secure to Spain the entire advantages of her colonies. 

While these provisions were taking place for its government, some circum- 
stances began to make their appearance, for which, however to be dreaded, 
no remedy could be found; and therefore, notwithstanding all other advan- 
tages, immediately threatened the dissolution of the colony. The consump- 
tion of the natives, which was the natural consequence of the inconsider- 
ate oppression of the Spaniards, (and in whom rested the source of all their 
prosperity,) became so evident, as to afford serious cause for alarm. Fatigue, 
to which they were unequal; diseases, the result of an inattention to their 
change of habit; famine, the effect of preferring so long the search of wealth 
in the mines to agriculture; and self-violence, the consequence of despair, 
conspired so forcibly, as to reduce their number upwards of 40,000 in the 
space of fifteen years, there remaining but about 60,000 out of more than a 
million, to which the original population amounted.” 

This diminution continued with such rapidity, as to occasion a stagnation 
not only of the colonial improvements, but of the common operations of life, 
which demanded immediate relief, and Ovando in consequence adopted an 
expedient which was again the source of enormities that seemed to increase 
in proportion to the progress of their society. The description will afford a 


*M. Charmilly, (Lettre 4 M. Edwards,) has a long, and, in some respects, sufficiently 
accurate calculation, to prove the original diminutive population of St. Domingo, in oppo- 
sition to Mr. Edwards’s general description of the massacre of a million of inhabitants. He 
falls, however, as is usual with those influenced by a spirit of party, into self-contradictions 
and inconsistency: for he alludes to a perfect knowledge of the topographical antiquities 
of the country, the existence of which he has proved to be impossible; and he supposes his 
author to have believed in the instantaneous sacrifice of a million of persons in the four 
chief mines of the country. General assertions are certainly distracting, and Mr. Edwards 
is too frequently superficial; but in this instance he is perfectly right. It is from Herrera, 
the most correct and intelligent of the Spanish historians, whom Dr. Robertson has also 
adopted, that the fact in the present text is derived, and not Oviedo, to whose amplifica- 
tions M. de Charmilly ascribes the supposed error. Benzoni states the original population 
at two millions. [Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdés (1478-1557) lived in Hispaniola 
and was named historiographer of the Indies in 1523. He wrote La historia general y natural 
de las Indias and Las Quinquagenas de la nobleza de España (1526-35). Girolamo Benzoni 
(c.1509-?) wrote Historia del Mondo Nuovo (1565). His exaggerated estimate is perhaps due 
to the work’s fiercely anti-Spanish slant and his attempt to paint the Spaniards as particu- 
larly barbarous masters. Estimates of the size of the native population when the Spaniards 
arrived at Hispaniola in 1492 range from 100,000 to 2,000,000. A census taken in 1507 
revealed that their numbers had fallen to 60,000. | 


CHAPTERI 29 


mild example of the temper and conduct experienced by the simple, and be- 
nevolent beings of whom, Columbus, with an ingenuousness natural to great 
minds, had spoken in such exalted terms to the Spanish court. He proposed 
to seduce the inhabitants of the Lucay Islands,* which had been previously 
discovered, to Hispaniola, “under the pretence that they might be civilized 
with more facility, and instructed to greater advantage in the Christian reli- 
gion, if they were united to the Spanish colony, and placed under the im- 
mediate inspection of the missionaries settled there.” Ferdinand, deceived 
by this artifice, or willing to connive at an act of violence which policy rep- 
resented as necessary, gave his assent to the proposal. Several vessels were 
fitted out for the Lucayos,”” the commanders of which informed the natives, 
with whose language they were now well acquainted, that they came from a 
delicious country, in which the departed ancestors of the Indians resided, by 
whom they were sent to invite their descendants to resort thither to partake 
of the bliss enjoyed there by happy spirits. That simple people listened with 
wonder and credulity; and fond of visiting their relations and friends in that 
happy region, followed the Spaniards with eagerness. By this artifice above 
forty thousand were decoyed into Hispaniola to share in the sufferings which 
were the lot of the inhabitants of that island, and to mingle their groans and 
tears with those of that wretched race of men.t 

The ardour for discovery, which had languished during the anxiety for 
the wealth of the mines, began to be renewed by an expedition under Juan 
Ponce de Leon,*° (who commanded under Ovando in the eastern district.) 
to the island of Puerto Rico, which in a few years was subjected to the fate 
of Hispaniola. Ovando also commissioned an officer, named Sebastian de 
Ocampo,” to ascertain the insular situation of Cuba, which Columbus had 
supposed to be a part of the neighbouring continent. 

But though late and unexpected, by a perseverance the most constant, a 
degree of justice was at length to be accorded to Columbus in the person of 
his son Diego? Almost wearied out in the courtly delay which had exhausted 
his father, he determined upon the bold alternative of an appeal against his 
monarch to a council for Indian affairs, which he had himself established. 
Unequal as the parties were, and recent as was its own existence, the court 
honourably sustained its integrity, and determined on the side of justice, even 
against the king: with this decision, and the support of powerful connections, 


*The same with the Bahamas. 

tHist. of Amer. vol. i. p. 263. I have quoted this from Dr. Robertson, as the best and most 
moderate description. His authorities are, Herrera, Dec. J. lib. 7. c. 3.; Oviedo, lib. 3. c. 6.; 
Gomara Hist. c. 41. [Francisco López de Gómara (c. 1511-66?) wrote La Historia General 
de las Indias (1552).] 


30 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


subsequently acquired by marriage, he soon obtained (though but a partial 
concession of his rights) the government of St. Domingo, and such privileges 
as enabled him to arrive in the island with more splendour and magnificence 
than had hitherto been witnessed: Ovando was of course recalled. That splen- 
dour, and the numerous retinue with which it was supported, while it added 
lustre to the settlement, effected no other change to the unhappy aborigines, 
than the seal of a more determinate slavery, by a numerical division of them 
among the Spaniards, according to the rank of the latter. 

The destruction of the labourers proportionally decreasing the produce of 
wealth to their masters, naturally excited an impatience in those who had 
been glutted with wealth, and satiated with dissipation. They had already 
begun to contemplate other countries, whose inhabitants were yet unex- 
hausted; they had established a pearl-fishery at the small island of Cubagua,°? 
and lodged a small colony on the continent, at the gulf of Darien,>* under the 
brave and enterprising, though as usual, unfortunate, Vasco Nugiiez de Bal- 
boa,” when Diego Columbus made a proposition to which they readily ac- 
ceded. This was the establishment of a colony in the neighbouring island of 
Cuba, to which an armament immediately embarked under the command of 
Diego Velasquez,*$ one of the companions of the great discoverer on his sec- 
ond voyage. The only circumstance concerning this expedition, as it regards 
the island which is more immediately under our consideration, besides its re- 
lief from a number of discontented members, was the opposition of Hatuey,°” 
a cazique, or prince, who having fled thither from St. Domingo, indignant at 
the destruction of his innocent subjects, might naturally be expected to op- 
pose the intrusion of their destroyers into the place of his refuge. His feeble 
party (for they were of the same inhostile nature with his former subjects) 
were soon dispersed, himself taken prisoner, and condemned to the flames 
under the barbarous maxim, which considered him only as a slave, who had 
taken arms against his master. “When Hatuey says Dr. Robertson,” “was fas- 
tened to the stake, a Franciscan Friar, labouring to convert him, promised 
him immediate admittance into the joys of Heaven, if he would embrace the 
Christian faith.” —“Are there any Spaniards,” says he, (after some pause), “in 
that region of bliss which you describe ?” “Yes,” replied the monk, “but only 
such as are worthy and good.” “The best of them,” rejoined the indignant 
cazique, “have neither worth nor goodness; I will not go to a place, where I 
may meet with one of that accursed race!” 

Another expedition soon took place from St. Domingo, to assist in the dis- 
covery of the South Sea, by the justly celebrated Balboa, from whose incur- 


“Hist. of America, vol. i. p. 277. edit. 1800. 


CHAPTERI 31 


sions in the continent on which he was established, he had sent home such 
quantities of gold, as tempted a number by no means contemptible to join 
him. It comes not into my promise to shed fruitless tears on the perverted for- 
tunes of this truly great man;°* his name, consigned to unfading memorials, 
has, I trust, its use with those who possess a fertile mind without the power 
to sustain its operations. —Though the passage to the Indian ocean was not 
obtained, as was expected, they reached the South Sea, and prepared the way 
for more important discoveries. 

In 1514, died more peaceably than he had lived, Bartholomus, the uncle 
of the present Governor; a man of very respectable powers, and an unsul- 
lied character; who had occasionally filled offices of high importance in the 
island, and who, it would appear, was more closely connected with its history 
than his contemporaries have enabled us to state. 

The government of Diego Columbus was neither inefficient nor violent; 
neither did he want inclination or ability to render the colony both prosper- 
ous and happy: but that justice which had been unwillingly accorded him, 
on the part of the deceased Monarch, was, as much as possible, impeded by 
every political artifice that could be employed. The meaner officers of the gov- 
ernment were encouraged to thwart the authority of the governor, in a variety 
of measures, and at length the power of distributing the Repartimientos°? was 
created into an office, and conferred upon Roderigo Albuquerque, the rela- 
tion of a confidential minister called Zapata. On the loss of this necessary ad- 
vantage, in addition to the embarrassment he had already experienced, Diego 
resolved on returning to Spain for the purpose of remonstrance: leaving be- 
hind him the best administration in his power, reached his destination in 
safety, but he soon found with very small hopes of redress in the object of his 
voyage. 

In his new capacity Albuquerque discovered no other care than to repair 
his own indigent circumstances, for which purpose he first ordered a renu- 
meration of the Indians, (now reduced to 14,000,) and then put them up to 
sale in different lots. This was the only stroke wanting to complete the extinc- 
tion of this unhappy race, by a consequent separation from the habitations to 
which they had been accustomed, and the imposition of additional labour for 
the indemnification of their purchasers. 

As is too frequently the case when political injuries become irreparable, 
those measures which, earlier adopted, would have preserved a sacrificed 
people; now served, only to excite useless controversy and public distur- 
bance; the Monks, who, since the ecclesiastical establishment of Ferdinand, 
had arisen to considerable power, began to oppose their eloquence publicly to 
the system on which the natives were reduced to absolute slavery, or rather, 


32 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


consigned to perish in progressive misery. They could not be insensible to 
the impolicy of the measure; and, no doubt, impressed with the inutility of 
a mission to a people who were rapidly ceasing to exist, they had early re- 
monstrated, but appear to have been easily silenced, till the present period. 
Even now, but a part of the mission, the Dominicans,” stood forth to repre- 
sent the mild precepts of religion; the Franciscans® attached themselves to 
the more popular cause; and while they could not unblushingly defend the 
Repartimientos, palliated the principle on the ground of expedience, so often 
improperly assumed in society. 

The consequence was, an application to the king by both parties, of which 
the only circumstance of importance, was the interference of Las Casas, a 
man of romantic disposition, and benevolent mind; whose exertions, though 
unsuccessful, were neither wanting in genius or perseverance; whose charac- 
ter cannot be omitted even in the compression of abridgment. It may be pre- 
viously observed, that the appeal was terminated on the side of the Francis- 
cans, a few regulations of their labour only being for decency promulgated; 
Albuquerque pursuing his violence and rapacity with impunity. 

Bartholomew de las Casas, (a Clergyman,) who came hither on the second 
voyage of Columbus, and who had early exerted himself in the cause of the 
Indians, was not to be diverted from his purpose; finding the rapacious gov- 
ernor deaf to all expostulation that militated against his immediate interest, 
he embarked for Spain, to make a personal appeal to the Emperor, and to 
exert that eloquence, of which he was so eminently possessed, in their behalf. 
Aided by fortuitous circumstances, he was particularly successful with the 
Emperor, then on the point of death, and with Cardinal Ximenes,°* who be- 
came Regent. The effect of this success was the appointment of three Super- 
intendants of the colonies, to whom were added a lawyer of probity named 
Zuazo,“ with judicial power, and Las Casas, with the title of Protector of the 
Indians. These soon arrived in St. Domingo, and began their career by the 
auspicious act of liberating all the natives who had been granted to the Span- 
ish courtiers, or to any person not residing in America. To avoid the influence 
of party spirit, neither of those orders, who had contended the subject were 
suffered to have a member among these Superintendants; they were com- 
posed of three Monks of the order of St. Jerome,® who appear to have exer- 
cised not only ability, but a knowledge of the world, which is seldom to be ob- 
tained in a cloister. The result of this mission was, as might be expected, only 
negatively advantageous to the Indians, without whose labour, reduced as it 
was, the colony could not be hoped to exist; the best regulations that could 
be formed were adopted for the prevention of excessive rigour and of cruelty 
towards them, while, without coercion, they ceased to work, and were obsti- 
nate in proportion to their power. 


CHAPTERI 33 


Las Casas still dissatisfied with any thing less than, the entire freedom of 
the Aborigines, and finding no countenance in the island, with undiminished 
perseverance, again returned to Spain and found Ximenes, as he had before 
found Ferdinand, on the point of death. With the Emperor, (Charles VS who 
immediately arrived from the Low Countries, and with his Flemish minis- 
ter, he prevailed so far, as to induce the recall of the superintendant and his 
colleague Zuazo; and Roderigo de Figuerra was appointed Chief Justice of 
the Island, with directions to moderate the sufferings of the Indians, and to 
prevent their threatened extinction. Finding that this, was all that could be 
accomplished, in the hurry of imagination which always marks such charac- 
ters, (not more eminently successful on some occasions, than dangerous on 
others, ) Las Casas now proposed, in support of his favourite scheme, to sub- 
stitute, in the place of those he wished to liberate from slavery in their own 
country, the inhabitants of a distant one, whom he appeared to consider more 
capable of labour, and more patient under sorrow.°’ 

The earliest advantage of the Portuguese in Africa had arisen from a trade 
in slaves,* but it had been abolished, and was considered ineffectual. About 
fourteen years before, the importation of a few slaves had been permitted 
by Ferdinand, but not as a public concern, and in 1511 the number was in- 
creased, without producing any effect on the population.®® This plan, which 
had been peremptorily refused by Ximenes, was adopted by Charles, who 
granted a patent to one of his Flemish favorites for an importation of the lim- 
ited number of four thousand; this privilege being sold to some Genoese mer- 
chants, proved the first formation of a regular trade for supplying the island, 
which has continued to increase through the whole Archipelago. 

Even the farther introduction of other Slaves produced so small a change in 
the Colony, that the invention of Las Casas was directed to other substitutes; 
and with a more plausible view, it occurred to him, that if Labourers could 
be induced to emigrate from the Mother Country, their habits of life would 
enable them to bear the effects of the climate under agricultural operations; 
and that they might, by soon becoming opulent citizens, introduce habits of 
industry, and a promotion of virtue: — but, though countenanced by the min- 
istry, his laudable plan was defeated by an ecclesiastic, who had long opposed 
him, the Bishop of Burgos.’ Thus deprived, of all his hopes with regard to 
his favourite Island, this extraordinary man turned his attention to the Con- 
tinent, and his schemes to the prevention of similar abuses in that part of the 
new world, which was yet but little explored. After many unsuccessful appli- 
cations in behalf of this colony of labourers, he at length obtained permission 


*For the origin of this traffic the reader is referred to a future chapter, to which it is 
more closely connected. 


34 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


to form one in Cumana; but with such opposition, that the number of colo- 
nists whom he could persuade to accompany him did not exceed two hun- 
dred. It is not within our plan to follow this unfortunate party through their 
various distresses, occasioned by the bewildered cruelty of their country- 
men:— prevented from arriving at their destined country by the detestation 
which was every where excited against the Spanish name, and unpopular 
with Spaniards as the followers of Las Casas, they became the innocent vic- 
tims of both parties; while their leader, driven from every asylum, shut out 
from all resource, abandoned, and houseless, took refuge in the Dominican 
convent in the city of St. Domingo; where he soon after assumed the habit of 
the order, and, as it may be readily supposed, did not long survive the death 
of all his happiness. 

The occasion of that violence which had every way met the party of Las 
Casas, originated more particularly in the predacious excursions of the Span- 
iards, who would seem in these piracies to have left no means of cruelty or 
depredation unattempted. When, by the extinction of the Natives, every ex- 
ertion of industry began to stagnate in St. Domingo, and even Slaves, were 
sold at a price beyond the reach of many, they fitted out a sort of Privateers,’° 
which, cruizing along the coast of the continent, under the pretence of trad- 
ing with the unsuspecting natives; whenever they found an opportunity, 
seized upon and sold them as slaves on their return: this conduct, however, 
combined all the Indians to revenge it, and in consequence, among others, 
two Dominican Missionaries were killed. This was the signal for more exten- 
sive hostilities, and Diego Ocampo, with five ships, and three hundred men, 
were dispatched to lay waste the country of Cumana, and to transport all the 
inhabitants that could be procured as slaves to St. Domingo. 

About this time, to add to the embarrassments of the colony, it suffered 
considerably from those extraordinary swarms of ants which sometimes used 
to infest the Archipelago, and injure the vegetation. After ineffectual many 
endeavours to destroy them, the Spaniards (according to Herrera) deter- 
mined on appealing to the saints; but some time elapsed before they could 
fix upon one for so singular a business; at last, however, being relieved from 
the disastrous effects of the insects, and happening to invoke St. Saturninus” 
at the same time, that saint acquired the merit of a miracle. 

The return of Diego Columbus to Spain appears to have been attended with 
some circumstances which are yet unknown, for he shewed no inclination 
to return to the new world, till we find him in 1523 called to Jamaica to sup- 
press a revolt of the Indians, in the absence of Francis de Garay,” its governor, 
who had embarked in an expedition against Panuco,” which had, without his 
knowledge, already submitted to the government. Among the political ar- 


CHAPTERI 35 


rangements of Ferdinand, was that which separated from the power of Diego 
the island of Jamaica, attaching it to that division of the continent, not sub- 
ject to his dominion: he, however, acted with a spirit no less creditable to his 
character than on former occasions, and regained the island; which after- 
wards descended to his heirs, and, yielded the title of Marquis, among other 
honors, which descended to his family. Diego Columbus died in 1525. 

To return to the domestic situation of Hispaniola, that quick decline, which 
we have already described, continued to be accelerated, by the cruelty and 
impolicy of those, to whom no means were exceptionable in the search of 
wealth. In external appearances, however, this decline was not perceptible, 
and the capital of St. Domingo, as is the case with all falling states, still pre- 
sented an august reverse to the internal poverty of its inhabitants. In 1528, 
the city is described by some Spanish historians, and particularly Oviedo, 
who was there at that time, as “not inferior to any in Spain, the houses mostly 
built of stone like those of Barcelona, but the streets much better, being large 
and plain, crossing each other at right angles. With the sea on the right, and 
the river Ozamo on the left, health and beauty were united more than in any 
other part of the world. Ships heavy laden discharged their cargoes in a man- 
ner under the house windows. The citadel, which stood exactly in the centre, 
also gave security to an extensive command. The houses were fit to receive 
any nobleman of Spain with his suite, and the grandeur of Don Diego’s palace 
as viceroy was beyond conception, and every way fitting to receive the king 
his master. The cathedral was of exquisite workmanship, and well endowed; 
the dignity of its bishop and canons well supported. There were three monas- 
teries, dedicated to St. Dominic, St. Francis, and St. Mary de Mercedes, and 
an hospital founded by Michael Passamont, the treasurer-general.”” 

How much were it to have been wished, that such public splendour had 
argued equal prosperity; that it did not, however, is certain, from every ac- 
count; and Benzoni asserts, that towards the middle of the sixteenth century, 
scarce one hundred and fifty of the native Indians remained alive.* 

The dealers in slaves, however, beginning to lessen their demands, as time 
and competition affected their trade, the colony might have once more re- 
covered itself by an attention to agriculture; but that cruelty which appeared 
to be inherent in the breasts of these early colonists, (increased by disappoint- 
ment and pecuniary difficulties,) excited in their new servants a spirit of in- 
surrection that soon broke into open revolt, and which, though unsuccess- 
ful, compelled their masters to a relaxation of their severity and inordinate 


avarice. 


*Benzoni, Nov. Orb. Hist. 


36 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


The consequences produced by the smallest degree of moderation, became 
soon perceivable in the increased cultivation, and sugar, tobacco, cocoa, gin- 
ger, cotton, peltry,’° &c. were shipped for Spain in such quantities, as induced 
the best hopes of their increase continuing; but these flattering hopes were 
not to be realized, the Spaniards remaining inactive, weak, unprotected, and 
useless. 

In 1586, Sir Francis Drake” came before the island, and pillaged the capital 
with a degree of barbarity, surprizing in the present refinement of European 
warfare. The invaders held possession of St. Domingo for a month, during the 
latter part of which they employed every means from day-break, till the heat 
became intense in the forenoon, to destroy the beautiful edifices that sur- 
rounded the town, but on which, from being composed of stone, fire made 
no great progress, and ordinary means became too laborious; after two hun- 
dred sailors, with as many soldiers to protect them, had been employed for 
several days only to destroy one third part of the town, and were completely 
wearied with the task, they condescended to accept of about 7,000 I. sterling 
as a ransom for the rest. 

Among the severities which were practised, the following will afford an ex- 
ample, which, notwithstanding its cruelty, some will think from the circum- 
stances of the times, not badly imagined: a negro boy having been sent on 
a message to the Spanish governor with a flag of truce, was run through the 
body by some straggling Spanish officers, and only lived to complain to the 
English general; he immediately ordered two friars, who were his prisoners, 
to be taken to the same spot, and hanged, commissioning another at the same 
time to acquaint the Spaniards, that until the party, who had thus murdered 
the general’s messenger, should be delivered into his hands, there should no 
day pass without the execution of two prisoners; on the following day the of- 
fender was produced, and his countrymen compelled to be his executioners.” 

The decline of the mother country could not fail to weaken the situation 
of her colonists, who had suffered neglect, even from the importance of her 
acquisitions at home. Those who remained, rather from a want of power to 
quit the island, than any other cause, sunk into a kind of debility and sloth 
that resigned them to every evil. Gradually degenerating from the spirit and 
manners of their ancestors, they became little anxious about any thing be- 
yond an indulgence, as degrading as fatal. Associating in common with their 
female slaves, they propagated a people of almost every grade of colour, and 


“See the account of this expedition in Hackluit’s Voyages.—Sir Anthony Shirley 
pursued a similar conduct in Jamaica in 1596. [Richard Hakluyt (c. 1552-1616), British 
writer and advocate of American colonization, author of Diverse Voyages Touching the Dis- 
coverie of America (1582). ] 


CHAPTERI 37 


became entirely a mixed colony, of which, Spaniards formed in fact a very 
small part. Their mines were deserted, agriculture was neglected, and their 
cattle ran wild in the plains. They employed themselves, as may be expected 
from such an irregular establishment, not only in an illicit foreign trade, but 
in piracies against the property of their own country, of which the practice 
of fitting out ships clandestinely, for the purpose of procuring slaves, (as has 
been already observed,) afforded them the best opportunities, and a secret 
understanding with the ships of war, guaranteed their safety and success. In- 
stead of an attempt to remedy this evil, of which there were many means,” 
the short-sighted policy of the Spanish court chose rather to complete the 
dejection of the islanders, by demolishing the sea-ports which had been illic- 
itly employed, and compelling the inhabitants to retire to the interior of the 
country. History is silent, during a considerable period of the existence of 
this miserable people, whose actions could indeed admit but of little variety; 
who are described as “demi-savages, plunged in the extremes of sloth, living 
upon fruits and roots, in cottages without furniture, and most of them, with- 
out clothes.”t—“Their slaves had little more to do,” says Raynal, “than to 
swing them in their hammocks;” nor can a more striking proof be given of 
the wretched situation of that country which had supplied empires with gold, 
than the necessity to which it was reduced, of adopting pieces of leather as a 
circulating medium among its inhabitants.+ 

While the government of Spain, however, was so remiss in regard to the 
colony, which might be considered as the centre of their possessions in the 
new world, they were as much the reverse, with respect to the admission 
of any other power into a participation of its produce, or its territory: — 
their caution extended even to absurdity; and all ships were stopped who 
were met beyond the tropics. Notwithstanding this care, during a war with 
Spain, the English and French, had become acquainted with the Windward 
Islands,” (whose warlike and sullen inhabitants, the Charibs, generally re- 
pelled the Spaniards, ) equipped a small fleet to interrupt the Spanish vessels 
in those seas, whose piracies were not interrupted by peace; in consequence 
of the jealous policy already described. A part of these under an enterpriz- 
ing Englishman named Warner,’ and the captain of a French privateer called 
Desnambuc,”’ took possession of the island of St. Christopher®° on the same 


* Among others, even the Flemish were refused the permission they requested to clear 
the lands of this fertile country, and revive its splendour by the more solid pursuits of agri- 
culture. 

tThe Abbé Raynal, — History of the Trade and Settlements in the East and West Indies, 
vol. iv. p.18. 

FEdwards’s History of the British West Indies, b. ii. 


38 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


day,“ and divided it into two equal shares; the fierce inhabitants, who had 
been more favorable to the enemies of the Spaniards than to themselves, re- 
tiring from the parts on which they were fixed, telling them nevertheless, 
with usual Indian acuteness, that “land must be very bad, or very scarce with 
them, since they had traversed such a distance with so much difficulty, to 
seek for it among savages.” 

The court of Madrid immediately alarmed, at the vicinity of these members 
of two active and industrious nations, ordered Frederic of Toledo," on his way 
against the Dutch in Brazil, to attack these newly established powers while 
they were yet weak in their new establishment; they were soon defeated, and 
those who were not either killed or taken prisoners, fled for refuge to the 
neighbouring islands. The greater part, however, returned to their posses- 
sions as soon as the danger was over, except a small number who remained on 
the little barren isle of Tortuga* lying off the north-west coast of Hispaniola, 
and within a few leagues of Port Paix." These, inconsiderable as they were 
in their outset, were the founders of a race which giving rise to the French 
colony that is soon to become an important part of this history, and being 
hitherto but imperfectly described, demands particular attention. 

Previously, however, it is but justice to the Spanish colony to say, that 
after the first surprize at seeing a large English fleet commanded by Admiral 
Penn,** with nine thousand land forces under Colonel Venables,®> (the same 
which afterwards conquered Jamaica,) who had been dispatched by Oliver 


Cromwell®® 


to obtain for England a portion of the new world, they compelled 
the enemy to re-embark with disgrace. A want of unanimity was the apology 
made on the part of the English, who ill brooking such a reception, deter- 
mined on no alternative between victory and death on their next and more 
successful attempt. 

By the middle of the seventeenth century these incursers had received 
some accessions from the French colonies, which had by that time been 
established, and assumed an appearance as formidable as it was singular. 
They had gradually obtained notice under the appellation of Buccaniers 
from their mode of curing animal food, which was derived from the savages, 
being slowly dried, or rather smoked, over fires of green wood, in places from 
thence called by the Spanish term, Buccans,®’ a custom yet retained by the 
Spaniards.®* As they were for a time destitute of wives and children, they asso- 
ciated pairs, (as recorded by former historians); property was common, and 
survivor inherited the residence; theft was unknown amongst them, though 


“Some writers state that Mr. Warner had obtained possession two years before, and had 
suffered the loss of his plantations by an hurricane. [This hurricane occurred in Septem- 
ber 1624.] 


CHAPTERI 39 


no precaution was used against it, a virtue they borrowed from the savages. 
They seldom disputed, but if any were obstinate, they decided with arms; 
and if any foul appearance occurred in the combat, as a back or side wound, 
the assassin was put to death. Every member of the fraternity assumed a war- 
like name on admission into the body, which descended to their several suc- 
cessors. Their dress consisted of a shirt died with the blood of the animals 
they killed in hunting; an apron, or trowsers, yet dirtier; a leathern girdle, 
containing a short sabre, and other knives; a sort of military cap, and shoes, 
without stockings. A Buccanier was satisfied if he could supply himself with 
a small gun, and a pack of dogs, to the number of twenty or thirty. Their em- 
ployment consisted chiefly in hunting the bulls, with which the Spaniards 
had furnished the neighbouring island; which they killed chiefly for the skins, 
regaling, perhaps, on a small part of the flesh, preparing it sometimes with a 
seasoning of pimento, and the juice of orange. 

The remainder of the indolent colonists could not, however, bear with 
the idea of more active neighbours; which gave rise to several unavailing 
conflicts, that ended in a determination to destroy all the bulls by a general 
chase, a scheme which had the effect of turning the attention of the Buccan- 
iers to the more permanent pursuits of agriculture. —Tobacco soon became 
a profitable culture, which, with the produce of several excursions made by 
the most intrepid in their cruisers, amply repaid their difficulties. However, 
another Spanish armament was commissioned for their extirpation, which 
inspirited them to deeds that will live to future ages — pregnant with bravery 
and horror. 

Possessed of an island eight leagues long and two broad, in a fine air, and 
with capability of improvement, unshackled by the prescriptions of ancient 
society, with a vast territory open to their predatory incursions, and numer- 
ous channels accessible to their maritime courage, the success of the Buccan- 
iers may be easily supposed to have spread. To this lawless, yet far from un- 
salutary dominion, those who sought a refuge from the tyranny of creditors, 
or of want, as well as enterprizing spirits without opportunity for action, in 
their mother-country, (particularly from Normandy,) had a resource, which 
formed a considerable acquisition to its power. Envious of the establishment, 
the court of Spain made an attempt to dislodge them, which is worthy of 
notice, only from its wonted cruelty; the general of the galloons exerted his 
commission while the greater part were at sea, or hunting on the large island; 
he put all he found to death, leaving Tortuga as desolate as possible. 

The effects of these cruelties, and the sentiments of revenge they inspired, 
produced a closer combination of the Buccaniers; for which purpose they 
agreed to sacrifice personal independence, to social safety, and accordingly 


40 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


appointed a leader, much in the same way, as the origin of all monarchies; as 
they were yet composed of English and French united, an Englishman, distin- 
guished for his prudence and valour, named WILLES, was the first appointed, 
who appears to have excited jealousy, by an invitation of his countrymen 
to the settlement, and the use too frequently made of power, when its ori- 
gin becomes forgotten in its advantages. A governor-general had, therefore, 
no sooner been appointed over the French windward islands,” than finding 
the opportunities probably agreeable, and being, perhaps, privately solicited, 
he sent a small force from St. Vincent, who, joined by the Frenchmen on 
the island, suddenly ordered all the English to withdraw from it; when sup- 
posing an order of such audacity supported by a much greater force, they 
immediately agreed to evacuate the island, and never returned. They still 
pursued the bold career in which they had embarked, and afterwards ob- 
tained regular commissions from the English government to act against the 
common enemy, though the settlements and navigations of the Spaniards 
continued the prominent objects of their hostility. One of them afterwards 
arrived at situations of honour and emolument, having received the dignity 
of knighthood, and being advanced to the high office of lieutenant-governor 
of Jamaica! His character, however, will be given more regularly among 
those of the other Buccaniers, to whom, as original founders of the French 
colony in St. Domingo, this history is more particularly directed. 

Alternately losing and gaining the little island of Tortuga from the Span- 
iards, the French, under a captain of their own choice and nation, at length 
retained it, and obtained a firm footing on St. Domingo, which rendered it, at 
the same time, of less importance. Of the consequence to which they arrived 
(a consequence which, to this day, furnishes the West Indies with legendary 
tales of their valour and honour), an idea will be best obtained by a descrip- 
tion of their mode of life and warfare, and of those characters to whom they 
were indebted, for many of the exploits which have rendered them conspicu- 
ous to the admiration, if not the approbation, of the present and of future 
ages. 


*This Governor, who was named De Poincy, appears to have held his appointment on 
the same tenor as Willes, receiving it when the increased followers of Warner and Des- 
nambuc had, in 1660, joined in a treaty independent of their respective governments, 
which had regarded them with indifference. By this treaty it is pleasing to see the native 
Charibs considered, Dominica and St. Vincent’s being appropriated to their reception. 
According to their respective rights of conquest, France obtained Guadaloupe, Martinico, 
Grenada, and some less considerable acquisitions; and England was confirmed in the pos- 
session of Barbadoes, Nevis, Antigua, Montserrat, and several other islands of little value. 
St. Christopher's still belonged to both nations. — See Raynal’s History, Vol. III. p. 284. &c. 
[Phillippe de Longvilliers de Poincy (1583-1660) enlisted the buccaneers to remove the 
English from Tortuga in 1640.] 


CHAPTERI 41 


They formed themselves into small companies, from fifty to three times 
that number, of whom, some appear to have preferred agricultural pursuits. 
As the authority they had conferred on their captain did not extend to their 
domestic economy, they were at perfect liberty as to their manners, or a pref- 
erence of rest or pleasure in their intervals of peace. Their armaments were 
formed of boats, without any difference, but in size, in which, they were ex- 
posed to all the inclemencies of the weather; as through their careless dis- 
positions, on shore they were subject to the severest extremities of hunger 
and thirst. After the various cruelties exercised by the Spaniards in the at- 
tempt to extirpate them, the sight of a ship is said to have transported them 
to frenzy;—no superiority of power affected them, they boarded as soon as 
possible, and the skill they had in the management of their small vessels, 
screened them from the fire of their enemies, while their fusleers,®? who 
presented themselves at the fore-part of their vessels by an excellent aim 
at the port-holes opposed to them, confounded the most experienced gun- 
ners. They seemed to have a religious notion of humility and gratitude, for 
they implored the aid of heaven to their success in any onset, and returned 
thanks to the deity for every victory obtained; such was their uninterrupted 
bravery, that the Spaniards, at length, trembled at their very approach, and 
surrendered immediately to those whom they designated as devils, as much 
as if they had been in reality preternatural beings. Among those whose names 
have come down to us, as having particularly distinguished themselves, were 
Montbar,®° a Frenchman; a Welshman (already mentioned) named Morgan; 
and a Dutchman, called Van Horn.” In the conduct of these men, may be 
seen the general character of the Buccaniers, the proportion of this sketch 
not admitting of a more enlarged insertion, which might otherwise be easily 
selected. 

Montbar was born a gentleman of Languedoc,” and his connection with 
the freebooters appears to have arisen neither from necessity nor chance, 
but an early spirit of romance—such as has determined the most heroic 
characters. Indeed, to those who have seen unqualified descriptions of the 
Spaniards in the New World, without an acquaintance with human life suf- 
ficient to discriminate, such a Quixotic idea will not excite surprize. It is 
said, that while at college having seen these accounts, their enormities had 
so strongly impressed him, that, acting in a private play the part of a French- 
man, who quarrelled with a Spaniard, it was with difficulty the performer 
of the latter character escaped from him with life. His imagination continu- 
ing to be heated by day-dreams, in which he beheld the expiring victims of a 
rage, more cruel than that of religious fanaticism, he viewed them, as calling 
on him for vengeance; although but imperfectly acquainted with the history 
of the Buccaniers, he determined to join them, and accordingly procured a 


42 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


ship for the expedition. On the passage they met with a Spanish vessel, which 
they immediately boarded, when Montbar was the first, sabre in hand, to 
fall upon the enemy; he broke through them, and hurrying twice from one 
end of the ship to the other, levelled every thing that opposed him. When 
the enemy surrendered, leaving to his companions the care of the booty, he 
desired only to contemplate, with horrid pleasure, the dead bodies of the 
Spaniards, which lay in heaps upon the decks, and seemed strengthened in 
the cause, in which he had so romantically embarked. Arriving on the coast 
of St. Domingo, the Buccaniers, who applied to barter provisions for brandy, 
pleaded, as an apology for their quality, that the Spaniards had recently taken 
advantage of their absence to destroy them: “And do you not seek revenge?” 
exclaimed Montbar. He soon found they were no more tardy in destruction 
than himself, and offered his services as a leader: was accepted, and aston- 
ished the boldest by his bravery. He continued with them during his life; and 
their sufferings (from his courage and success) procured for him, among the 
Spaniards, the appellation of The Exterminator. 

Van Horn was a native of Ostend,” whose intrepidity in the discipline of his 
crew, is the only peculiar trait handed down to us. He commanded a frigate, 
which was his own property. In the heat of an engagement, he was constantly 
seen in every part of the ship; and where he observed any one shrink at the 
sudden report of the cannon, he instantly killed him. He became the idol of 
the brave, and liberally shared with his successful companions, the riches so 
dreadfully acquired. 

It is pleasing to turn from characters terminating with the same violence 
with which they set out, to one who, after having blazed in the full strength 
of a meridian-sun of power, is seen retiring to the mild evening of domestic 
life. 

MORGAN, the Welshman, only remains to be mentioned, descended from 
respectable parents in Glamorganshire,* whom he early quitted (as it was 
then termed) in search of his fortune. His adventurous spirit leading him 
accidentally to Bristol,” he found an opportunity of embarking for the West 
Indies, in the way of many others, by indenting himself for four years to serve 


*I wish to be acquitted of any local preference in the description of these men, or par- 
tiality of delineations in their characters. But notwithstanding the representation given of 
Morgan (in extension of the calumnious old history of the Buccaniers) by the Abbé Raynal, 
he is constrained to confess, that in the midst of hostility he fell in love with a beautiful 
Spaniard; and that he did not sacrifice her to his wishes, though she attempted his life. A 
breast capable of admitting a passion of this nature, under such circumstances, could not 
surely be considered as the most barbarous; and of the respectability of his subsequent 
character, we have certainly the best account. 


CHAPTERI 43 


a planter. When released from a service executed with fidelity, he joined the 
Buccaniers, and adding ability to courage, soon shared their success and their 
riches. One of the exploits which first rendered him famous was the capture 
of Porto Bello®® (which Admiral Vernon?” afterwards destroyed with diffi- 
culty); for which, the plan of operations was so well contrived, that he took 
it without opposition. In attacking the fort, to spare the effusion of blood, 
he compelled the women and the priests, whom he had made prisoners, to 
set the scaling-ladders to the walls, from an idea, that the Spaniards would 
not fire at the objects of their love and reverence. Their omnipotent power, 
however, was wealth, in preference to religion or beauty; and the humane 
expedient miscarried, to the great injury of the besieged. The conquest of 
Panama’? seems to have been attended with prodigious difficulty, both by 
sea and land; but even here, he did not forget a merciful expedient— buying 
the fortified island of St. Catharine,°? which was necessary to his progress. At 
Panama they found immense treasures: among the dreadful sacrifices that 
were made, some circumstances less severe are recorded: vanity received a 
singular punishment; and it was here that Morgan became captivated by a 
captive. The first of these circumstances occurred in a beggar, who, entering 
a castle deserted by its owners, found some rich apparel, which, in preference 
to every thing else, he adopted; the besiegers entered, and pressed the gro- 
tesque noble for his wealth, when, pointing to the rags he had just quitted, 
he received the effects of his folly and pride in a death scarcely unmerited. 
Morgan, appears to have addressed the lady by whom he was smitten, with 
respect and forbearance, sentiments not always to be found, in more refined 
invaders, and they met with a contrary return. “My fortune and my liberty, 
which depended on others,” said the indignant fair, “you have already, but my 
honour is my own care;” upon which, she drew a poignard from beneath her 
dress, and attempted to plunge it into his breast; fortunately he avoided the 
blow. —Agonized with passion, yet incapable of violation, with more philoso- 
phy than is often called forth under such circumstances, it is probable that he 
wisely and nobly tore himself from the scene of his attraction, as he suddenly 
quitted the spot; even before his companions could accompany him. On the 
peace, which a few years after took place, between England and Spain, he 
retired to Jamaica, and having purchased a plantation, betook himself with 
much industry to its cultivation. He succeeded in these tranquil pursuits, 
and, in time, grew into equal repute in a pacific life to that which he had 
experienced in war; he was called to bear a part in the government of the 
island in which he had become a proprietor; and, finally, to the command of 
Lieutenant-Governor of Jamaica, and to the dignity of knighthood.” He exe- 
cuted the duties of every situation in which he was placed with probity and 


44 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


honour; and a writer of the present day,“ who saw some of his letters in the 
possession of a friend on the island, describes them as manifesting a spirit of 
humanity, justice, liberality, and piety. 

It is painful to relate, that Sir Henry Morgan, three years before the close 
of his chequered and useful life, was committed to the Tower"?! by King 
James II. at the instance of the Spanish Emperor, where he remained till his 
death without trial, and of course without conviction of any crime."°? Though 
a sacrifice to the same monarch, with his great predecessor Raleigh, his life 
was not, however, included, and he died in peace. 

To return to the community of Buccaniers, although separated from each 
other, the English and French still continued to act in concert; the latter re- 
tiring, after the conflict, to St. Domingo, to share the spoil, and the former to 
Jamaica. When any were maimed, the first steps, were those taken for their 
provision in the most honourable way; no one secreted any share of the booty 
under pain of expulsion; nor had favour any influence in its division, which 
was with much judgment. Dissipation of every kind succeeded their advan- 
tages, and he who was rich one day, resigned himself to poverty the next. They 
continued to increase in force, and to proportionally depress the Spaniards, 
who, at length, retired into a sullen inactivity, which passively continued, till 
all other communication with their mother-country ceased, than that which 
could be maintained by a single ship of no great burthen. 

Nor did the Buccaniers themselves continue to prevail as they had been 
accustomed. After the settlements of the French and English in the New 
World became established, many were killed and lost, and some adopted agri- 
culture; till, at length, France, who had not been altogether ignorant of its 
progress, became attracted by the infant colony then formed in St. Domingo, 
if it could yet be so called. 

The number of planters to whom only could be really accorded the char- 
acter of colonists did not exceed four hundred; the first care of the govern- 
ment then was to multiply this number, and to form them into a more regu- 
lar society; for this purpose it commissioned a gentleman named Bertrand 


D’Ogeron,'°? who had emigrated from Anjou’ 


about nine years before, but 
who had evinced too much virtue and sensibility to hope for commercial suc- 
cess, without a better fortune. With the best contrived plans he had failed; 
but the ability and fortitude, he had shewn in adversity, had won him the 
general esteem and attachment so much, that he was considered as the most 


proper person to direct, or rather to settle the colony. 


“Bryan Edwards, Esq. M.P. F.R.S. &c. [History, Civil and Commercial, of the British Colonies 
in the West Indies (1793). | 


CHAPTERI 45 


Of the difficulty of such an enterprize, none could doubt but himself, de- 
pending much on his own powers, who knew no other wish, than the good of 
human kind; he began by reconciling the idle to labour, and those who had 
traded with all the world, to the monopoly of a privileged company, which had 
the year before, been established for all the French settlements.’ He held 
out allurements for new inhabitants in a country which had suffered every 
species of calumny: when the maritime determined to go in search of greater 
advantages, he seduced them to stay, even by relinquishing the revenues of 
his post, and procuring them commissions from Portugal to attack the Span- 
iards, when they had made peace with France; to the huntsmen he advanced 
money without interest to erect habitations: and to the planters he united 
every encouragement. Nor did he long suffer them to remain in a cheer- 
less celibacy, which denied an increase of population by the best and most 
natural of all means, and left them without the most powerful attraction to a 
fixed residence —that of mild, unassuming beings, who create comforts un- 
known by any other means; conferring interest and felicity, while they are as 
ministering angels to alleviate the sorrows, and soften the asperities of man. 
D’Ogeron sent for women, and obtained an hundred from France — such as 
should be the female inhabitants of an infant colony, young, healthy, amiable, 
and enterprising. To prevent the effect of the most impetuous of passions, he 
contrived, that while choice was not entirely suppressed, those should first 
become husbands whose industry had rendered them equal to the payment 
of an adequate sum; and the others (who respected social justice) waited 
anxiously to be so blessed in their turn: but they were disappointed, and the 
colony injured, as is too often the case, by expedients of which their insuf- 
ficiency is the most favorable objection. The females, who afterwards made 
their appearance from the mother country, as if all regard for the constitu- 
tions of society, had been lost, were those for whom delicacy would wish to 
find a better name than the refuse of cities; selected without discrimination, 
they were bound as to masters for three years; of such a connexion, we need 
not attempt the description. The only circumstance worthy of record respect- 
ing it, is the declaration of the Buccaniers, who chiefly adopted them, on their 
simple marriage. “I ask you no questions,” said he, “respecting your former 
life, but you are now mine; and if you prove false, this,” putting his hand to the 
muzzle of his gun, “will revenge me.” The effects of the profligacy introduced 
at this time were long, very long felt. In the course of four years, however, 
D’Ogeron found means to increase the number of planters in proportion to 
the population, so that, in 1699,'°° they amounted to more than 1,500. 

In the following year the benign exertions of this good man, received a 
check from the elation of the India Company, which is the too frequent con- 


46 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


sequence of successful monopolies. Conceiving themselves secure in a new 
and extensive trade, and not satisfied with a moderate profit, they ventured to 
raise the prices of their goods in a proportion of two thirds; the colonists, who 
had not yet changed their natural inclinations to violence, had immediate re- 
course to arms, and the price of tranquillity was a free trade to France, except 
an allowance of five per cent, to the company, to be paid by all ships on their 
arrival and departure. Even this disaster afforded D'Ogeron an opportunity 
for exertions of beneficence, of which only himself was capable. He procured 
two ships seemingly intended for his own produce, but, in fact, for the use 
of the colony. Every one shipped his commodities on board these vessels at 
a moderate freight, and, on their return, the cargo brought from the mother 
country was exposed to public sale at prime cost. A general credit was given 
without interest, and even without security, this generous governor hoping to 
inspire them with probity and noble sentiments by such a confidence: thus, 
under a jurisdiction so exquisite, every public disaster served but to consoli- 
date the colony; and could not fail also to excite a regret the most poignant, 
on an occasion which happened much too early; for the patriotic and benevo- 


lent D’Ogeron was cut off in the midst of his parental offices in 1673,7 


an ex- 
ample of every humane and social virtue. 

It was three years before the much lamented death of D’Ogeron, that the 
town of Cape Francois had been founded. It is to be regretted as a conse- 
quence of religious intolerance to drive from their country its most useful 
members. Gobin, a calvinist,° flew from persecution to the mild state of 
St. Domingo, and built the first habitation on the cape, to which he invited 
others, who immediately flocked thither as the ground became cleared. 

The place held by D’Ogeron was supplied with tolerable success by his 
nephew, M. Ponancey,'”? who, although described as of a less amiable dis- 
position than his uncle, seems to have followed him in his laudable plan of 
government. He had the honor of completing what his great predecessor had 
so ably begun, the establishment of a colony upon a regular and firm basis, 
without the promulgation of laws, or the coercion of military force. More 
virtue than could be expected, from a variety of governors, was, however, re- 
quired to sustain such a government; as licentiousness, naturally increased 
with population, aided by the unfortunate introduction of females, of the 
character already mentioned, it became of course necessary to submit to ordi- 
nary forms. Two administrators were therefore commissioned from Marti- 
nico,"° who established courts of judicature for the several districts, account- 
able to a superior council at Petit Goäve.™ These innovations were gained 
by a little finesse without much disagreement, and, but for the interference 
of private interest, which will ever obtrude upon infant establishments, the 
colony might have immediately opened a mine of wealth upon its shores. 


CHAPTERI 47 


It may not be improper to remark here, as a glaring instance of the want of 
power, or capacity in the Spanish colony, that in 1685” it suffered the Duke 
of Albemarle,’ then governor of Jamaica, and Sir William Phipps,’ to ob- 
tain considerable wealth, by raising the wreck of a Spanish plate ship which 
had been stranded off the north-east coast of their own territory twenty-four 
years before, on a shoal between the north and south riff, almost in sight of 
Old Cape François. 

Skins and tobacco, were hitherto, the principal articles of commerce from 
the French colony; for the latter, in consequence of the restrictions, they 
substituted indigo and cocoa; for similar reasons the profitable culture of 
cotton, which had been added, was soon abandoned. Hitherto the labours of 
the colony had been prosecuted chiefly by the poorest of the inhabitants, and 
a few negroes, which had been obtained by successful expeditions against 
the Spaniards; but in the war of 1688, several slaves being taken from the 
English, they began to contemplate the culture of the sugar-cane, as an addi- 
tional source of wealth, and one of the greatest importance. With this view 
they continued to increase their stock of negroes, by every means in their 
power, though but slowly, till the year 1694, when, taking advantage of a 
combination of misfortunes which had reduced Jamaica, the governor (a spir- 
ited man, who had before desired permission to chase the Spaniards from 
his own colony,) landed in that island with a force, which shewed the an- 
terior progress of St. Domingo to power, and increased it more than any other 
event, that had hitherto occurred. Whatever were the other motives that in- 
duced this expedition, Du Casse'® seems to have had an eye to the principal 
necessities of his colony, by including in his booty a considerable number of 
negroes, perhaps not less than two thousand." The other captured property, 
added to the private wealth of some of the remaining Buccaniers, (if those 
embarked in privateering, could be still so called,) enabled them to employ 
these slaves, and furnish buildings and articles for the production of sugar. 
The year following, however, the English returned the compliment of M. Du 
Casse, by attacking the now flourishing settlement of Cape Frangois, in con- 
junction with the forces of Spain, which they took, plundered, and reduced 
to ashes. It was soon, however, rebuilt on the same site; and from this period 
no difficulty or misfortune to the colony, was sufficient to impede its grad- 
ual progress to that eminence, which obtained for it, in another century the 
appellation of the Garden of the West Indies. 

The peace of Ryswick'” afforded the first regular cession of the western part 


u8 and 


of the island to the French; for the preceding treaties of Aix la Chapelle 
Nimeguen™® in 1668 and 1678 did not, by any means, conciliate the national 
antipathies in St. Domingo; and even by it there were no other boundaries 


established to the possessions thus ceded, than a custom, constantly sub- 


48 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


mitted to change from a variety of circumstances. By this cession the French 
appear to have obtained all the territory excluded, without an oblique line 
reaching from the then Cape François on the north-east coast, to Cape Rosa 
on the west, intercepting the towns of Isabella and Jago at the one point, and 
those of Petit Goäve and Port Louis at the other.” Still, therefore, the scene 
of constant feuds between the more ancient colonists and their neighbour, a 
large part of the colony towards the south, continued unoccupied, except by 
a few straggling inhabitants in miserable huts, and it remained a desirable ob- 
ject with the government to procure its settlement, in some way, at once both 
permanent and effectual. To accomplish this end, another company was privi- 
leged in France, which adopted the title of St. Louis,” to whom this fine and 
extensive country was granted as a property for thirty years; on condition — 
that it should open a contraband trade with the Spanish continent, and clear 
the ground. The company immediately granted lands to all who chose, with 
certain allowances, providing them also with slaves and other necessaries, 
and every thing began to wear a promising aspect. The colony continued to 
increase with so much vigour, that, at the beginning of the next century a 
superior jurisdiction became necessary in Cape François, and it was accord- 
ingly established in 1702. The town of the Cape was, in every other respect, 
the capital of the colony, though, except in time of war, when it was removed 
hither, Port-au-Prince was the seat of the government. 

In proportion as the French colony rose in splendor, the Spanish inhabi- 
tants decreased in comfort, apparently shrinking from the effects of an in- 
dustry they could not reach; yet, the former was not without difficulties to 
counterbalance its advantages: for in the year 1715, the death of nearly all the 
cocoa trees on the colony, deprived it of a very lucrative revenue; and shortly 
after, it experienced, in common with more important states, a shock that 
threatened its total subversion. This flourishing colony had arrived at a pitch 
of prosperity and refinement, sufficient to enable many of its proprietors to 
return with ample fortunes to France, or retire under easy circumstances 
when age required it; but when Law’s fatal scheme of finance exploded, 
those whose property had been paid for in the notes, or securities of the Mis- 
sissippi company? or others, allied to them, were left destitute, without any 
hopes of retribution; many returned poor to the island, from which they had 
departed rich, and were compelled to serve those, who had formerly been 
their servants, for bread. The presence of these unfortunate victims, seemed 
to prolong a sensation with respect to that delusive stroke of policy, which 


*From the demarcation on the map of Herman Moll executed in less than twenty years 
after. 


CHAPTERI 49 


nothing else could have occasioned; it, however, recovered the shock; and, 
in its worst moments, surrounded by the pleasing effects of successful indus- 
try, might look with pity upon the opposite situation of its neighbours; if such 
sentiments could be expected to prevail under a disparity of circumstances. 

In 1717, the Spanish colony, (which had in the time of Herrera, according 
to his history, included 14,000 pure Castilians”* among its inhabitants, with 
a proportional population in every class,) had only 18,410 souls of every de- 
scription; and, but for the ecclesiastical and juridical importance of its dilapi- 
dating capital, perhaps scarcely even a vestige would have remained. Without 
affecting, in allusion to these times, either the bigotry, which must be occa- 
sionally allowed in Edwards, or the inveteracy of Raynal, in favor of peculiar 
opinions, we may clearly view, in this decline, the fatal consequences of in- 
tolerance and cruelty, while we can happily contemplate with redoubled plea- 
sure the agreeable contrast, which a mild regimen affords through every class 
of created beings. 

In 1720, the produce of the French colony amounted, according to Ray- 
nal,* to 1,200,000 pounds weight of indigo, 1,400,000 pounds of white sugar, 
and 21,000,000 pounds of raw sugar, and its increase was as rapid, as it was 
successful: never satisfied, however, with ordinary advantages, it is the very 
nature of monopoly to grasp at every opportunity of increasing its exclusive 
rights, without any regard to those which are the objects of its privileges. In 
consequence of a degree of insolence, with which, the introduction of a mea- 
sure intended to confine the trade of slaves to themselves was conducted, a 
violent commotion took place in 1722, which was not quelled entirely for two 
years, during which period the buildings and ships of the company were de- 
stroyed, and their commissioners disgraced. It will naturally be supposed that 
a commotion which extended with the most inconceivable firmness through 
every part of the island, affected the progress of cultivation and commerce 
for some time after the re-establishment of peace; yet, in 1734, we find a 
considerable increase of plantations, in which the growth of cotton, and cof- 
fee, had been added to a great extent. This increase of opulence, occasioned, 
naturally, an augmentation of the respectability of the government, for in 
1750 we find a new establishment at Port-au-Prince, the capital, which now 
became the residence of a commander in chief, a superior council, and an in- 
tendant.” 

In the year 1754, the amount of the various commodities of the colony was 
equal to 1,261,469 l., but such was its increasing prosperity, that the inhabi- 
tants received from the mother country, imports to the amount of 1,777,509 I. 


*Settlements and Trades in the East and West Indies, vol. iv. p- 235. 


50 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


The population of pure whites amounted to upwards of 14,000; free mu- 
lattoes nearly 4,000; and upwards of 172,000 negroes of different descrip- 
tions. There were 599 sugar plantations, and 3,379 of indigo. The cocoa trees 
amounted to 98,946; the cotton plants to 6,300,367; and there were near 
22,000,000 of cassia trees. The provisions consisted of near 6,000,000 of 
banana trees; upwards of 1,000,000 plots of potatoes; 226,000 plots of yams; 
and near 3,000,000 trenches of manioc. The cattle did not exceed 63,000 
horses and mules, and 93,000 head of horned cattle.” 

In short, the remaining events of St. Domingo, up to the period of the 
French revolution, consists of a series of successes the most brilliant, and a 
display of industry and opulence the most creditable to the French character. 
Even the government of Madrid seems to have been excited, to some degree 
of emulation about the year 1757, as a company was formed at Barcelona,’ 
with exclusive privileges, to attempt a re-establishment in the eastern part 
of the island. The most, however, that appears to have been accomplished, 
was the equipment of two small vessels annually, by which they received in 
return, a few thousand hides, and some other trifling articles; but in 1765, 
when Charles III. opened a free trade to all the Windward Islands, they 
suddenly assumed quite an altered appearance; and Hispaniola, so long de- 
pressed by the false policy of the mother country, seem determined to at- 
tempt a renewal of her former activity. During the five years preceding 1774, 
the custom-house duties were more than doubled. It extended, however, 
comparatively to little more than a dying struggle. The French still continued 
to increase rapidly; in 1764, they had a force of 8,786 white men, capable of 
bearing arms, with whom 1,414 mulattoes were enrolled, and their slaves had 
increased to 206,000.”° In 1767, they laded 347 ships for France, besides a 
considerable overplus, not less than one fifth of that number, distributed in 
various ways. 

As if it were to temper the success of this splendid colony, a dreadful earth- 
quake happened on the third day of June, 1770, which levelled the capital, 
Port-au-Prince, with the ground. It has been, however, rebuilt with additional 
convenience, and enlarged with much labour, several streets having been 
raised upon the shore by means of causeways, though it does not possess, by 
any means, the elegance of Cape François; many of the buildings being com- 
posed of wood. 

In 1776, a determinate cessation took place of the dreadful feuds which 
had constantly occurred between the Spanish and French inhabitants of the 
colony, by the formation of a new line of demarcation,” to separate the dif- 


“Raynal, vol. iv. p. 236. 


CHAPTERI 51 


ferent partitions of the island. This settlement, though from a strange avarice 
in the Spaniards of territory, which they knew not how to occupy, appears to 
encroach considerably on the former possessions of France, was a most desir- 
able concession to the latter. Nor were the consequences of this agreement 
less favorable to the Spaniards in other respects: for they afterwards opened 
amore liberal commerce with their neighbouring colonists; whom they sup- 
plied with every description of cattle, receiving in return through their means 
all the productions of Europe, and expending with them the monies received 
from Spain for the purposes of the government. 

After the conflict between Great Britain and her American colonies,’ the 
Spanish government began to pay more regard to its territories in that quar- 
ter, and it accordingly became furnished with a more respectable garrison. 
Since that time, the number of Europeans added to it, tended also to improve 
its respectability as a colony. 

From this period, to the commencement of revolutionary activity in 1789, 
when those principles’? which had long been concealed in a smouldering 
flame, were about to have vent through the world, the French establishment 
in St. Domingo reached a height superior, not only to all other colonial pos- 
sessions, but to the conception of the philosopher and politician; its private 
luxury, and its public grandeur, astonished the traveller; its accumulation of 
wealth surprized the mother country; and it was beheld with rapture by the 
neighbouring inhabitants of the islands of the Antilles. Like a rich beauty, 
surrounded with every delight, the politicians of Europe, sighed for her pos- 
session; but they sighed in vain; she was reserved for the foundation of a re- 


public as extraordinary as it is terrible, #° 


whether it ultimately tend only, to 
the ascertainment of abstract opinions, or unfold a new and august empire to 
the world, where it has heretofore been deemed impossible to exist. 

It remains only to the present division of the work, to add a brief account 
of the general appearance of the island, as it existed at this date of its history; 
which, will then subdivide itself into the different heads, under which it is 
proposed to consider the causes, progress, and consequences of its revolu- 
tion, and present establishment. 

Notwithstanding, the reduced state of that part of the island which still 
continued in the possession of Spain, what has been collected of its topogra- 
phy, or, natural history, shall, in justice to the ancient proprietors, commence 
the brief detail which concludes the present chapter. 

The Spanish division of St. Domingo is understood to have comprehended, 
at that period, the whole territory within the diversified line of demarcation, 
fixed upon a few years before, which confined the French to apparently an 
insignificant part of the island. Commencing with the river Du Massacre on 


52 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the north, it stretched in an irregular curve towards the west, crossing all the 
great roads from Fort Dauphin and the Cape, passing the hills at about thirty 
miles distant from the coast, and intersecting the conflux of the streams of 
La Trouble and Plaisance; when, turning shortly round the hills at Atalaye, it 
assumes its southern direction, and crossing the stream of La Petite Rivière at 
its mouth, stretches through a delightful plain watered by the great river Arti- 
bonite: crossing this, and the river Du Fer, and winding round a single hill, it 
then proceeds through the little lake of Cul de Sac; returning to its eastward 
direction, it falls in with the river à Pitres at a point nearly opposite to that of 
its departure, having formed an ellipsis of not less than 170 miles, the nearest 
point approaching within a very short distance of the town of Gonaives, situ- 
ated in the bay of that name, upon the western coast.” 

It will be perceived, what a large proportion of this delightful territory, re- 
mained in the possession of Spain; which, whatever the degraded character 
we have been obliged to attribute to its possessors, must have produced a 
very ample return for the cultivation they bestowed upon it. With an extent of 
coast of between five and six hundred miles, in which are not less than seven 
capacious bays, (with innumerable inlets,) into which twenty large rivers, be- 
sides many nameless streams, discharge themselves; while the interior, con- 
sisting of large fertile plains, well watered, and protected, rather than inter- 
rupted, by the different chains of mountains with which they are variegated; 
producing the most delightful and salubrious vallies: nothing was wanting 
but the moderate labour of the cultivator, and a liberal policy, to render it 
the most desirable country in the world. In wanting these, however, it sunk 
into a beautiful wilderness, and its sullen shores repelled the eye which had 
been attracted by distant fertility. On sites that would have received and en- 
couraged the population of cities, were placed the solitary huts of fisher- 
men; whose miserable toils, perhaps, a melancholy monk was embittering by 
a thousand painful restrictions of his poverty-stricken career on earth, and 
dreadful views of eternity; the result of morbid intellects, nursed by the wild 
scene around him. 

The principal towns, after the ancient city of St. Domingo, were, Monte 
Christi, La Vega, St. Jago, formerly that of the Conception, Zeibo, St. Thomé, 
Azua, and Isabella, if the latter could deserve the appellation. The other places 
were merely villages of the most wretched appearance, which, instead of al- 
luring society from the distant provinces, seemed rather to mark with desola- 
tion those natural meadows with which they abounded. The most important 


*This line is believed to be accurately delineated in the corrected map of the island pre- 
fixed to the present work. 


CHAPTERI 53 


of these were St. Laurent, a few miles north of the capital, in which were a 
few villas, very inviting, from the beauty of the plain in which it was situated; 
Higuey, whose advantageous situation on the river of that name, might have 
procured for it much more importance; Baya, Bayaguana, and Monte Plata, 
surrounded by the finest land in the known world, and in the vicinity of for- 
ests, whose riches and utility were unappreciated; Cotuy, near the union of 
the rivers Yuna and Cotuy, about eight leagues from the centre of the bay of 
Samana; St. Juan de Maguana, delightfully placed on the banks of the Neybe, 
and separated by a small mountainous district from the lake of Riquille; St. 
Jean de Goava and Banica, served often as points of the commerce between 
the two colonies, as well as Atalaye, which stretched towards the extremity 
of the angle reaching into the French division opposite the bay of Gonaives; 
St. Miguel, Dejabon, Venta de Cana, Sala, Jarbon, Espani, and Amina, distrib- 
uted in the course of a few leagues from the northern coasts, though inhab- 
ited bya kind of wealthy graziers, form a powerful contrast to the wild beauty 
of the surrounding country. 

St. Domingo, the capital, and seat of the ecclesiastical government of the 
colonies, and at one time of the whole of the Spanish dominion in the new 
world, still continued an archiepiscopal see, to which the bishops of the other 
islands were suffragans.'*' It is situated, as hath been before described, near 
the mouth of the river Ozama, on the southern coast of the island, and on 
the border of a fertile and delightful level of near ninety miles in length, and 
thirty in breadth, significantly called Los Llanos. The cathedral, and other 
public buildings, yet retained no mean degree of importance; and, notwith- 
standing their dilapidating antiquity, wore an elegance of appearance that 
was not to have been expected. The remains of many other superb buildings 
of antiquity were yet to be seen, and those of a modern date of brick, stone, 
and wood, were not unworthy the capital of such a territory. It yet contained 
several religious establishments, and what is of more importance, the ex- 
tent and safety of its harbour, containing an ample depth of water, and, pro- 
tected by a bar, over which the largest vessels rode with safety, could not fail 
to render it of great commercial interest. The streets were principally broad, 
and towards the middle of the town retained their original rectangular neat- 
ness; they were also clean, and enlightened by three handsome squares. It yet 
contained an appearance of great strength towards the sea, and even on the 
side of the land it was guarded by a sufficient wall. Some remains yet exist of 
the ancient citadel, and also of the palace of the First Viceroy. 

The town of Monte Christi still retained a busy appearance, and some de- 
gree of importance, from its continued traffic with the neighbouring conti- 
nent of North America, and the vicinity of some of the most flourishing plan- 


54 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


tations of the French colony. During the wars between England and France, 
while Spain was disengaged from the troubles, the Spaniards traded much to 
this part, as did also the English smugglers. 

La Vega, neither pleasing nor convenient, situated in the extensive plain of 
the Vega Real, which is, in length, nearly that of half the island, though sel- 
dom exceeding thirty miles in breadth, derived its chief consequence from 
the surrounding pasturage, and some excellent sugar-walks in its vicinity. 

St. Jago retained a considerable air of antiquity, but no other recommen- 
dation; for all the former grandeur which it would appear to have possessed 
is now in ruins, and it affords but an additional monument of desolation; yet 
it contained a miserable monastery of Franciscans, to whom were attached 
some of the finest lands in the neighbourhood; but whose chief power seemed 
to be employed in the rule of the slaves in the adjacent plantations, in the care 
of whose religious duties they frequently forgot their temporal avocations. 

Zeibo was a place of some business, from being the only town towards the 
eastern coast, as St. Thomas is, again, from being situated in the very centre 
of the island, among the mountains of Cibao. Agua was also of little other im- 
portance than from being placed in the middle of a very fine bay on the south- 
ern coast. The first and the last of these towns, besides their desolatory state, 
bordering on extensive swamps, were therefore unhealthy; while St. Thomé, 
receiving the invigorating winds, as they sweep from the mountains on one 
side, and the salubrious breeze from the plains on the other, was a situation 
desirable for the farmer, or the valetudinarian, and capable of much improve- 
ment. On the site of the first city erected in the new world, in honour of Isa- 
bella, remain a few houses and ruins, while here and there a solitary cross 
peeping from amidst the luxuriant grass, served just to tell us— “such things 
were.” One little stream watered its vicinity, and a rugged road marked its few 
occasions to direct an inquisitive traveller to its haunts. 

Of the ecclesiastical government of the island, little shall here suffice. Not- 
withstanding that conduct on the part of the clergy which had compelled 
certain regulations of their conduct, and the liberality of sentiment which 
began to gain ground in Spain, the American church still retained an inor- 
dinate power over every class of the community, and an undue interference 
with every object of the colony. Independent of the papal jurisdiction,* and 
originally endowed with immense revenues from the wealth, and afterwards 
the devotion of the people, they still continued in extraordinary numbers, 


*The Emperor Ferdinand having obtained from the Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 
such an exemption on the first discovery of the New World, to favour its extension. [Ferdi- 
nand VI (1713-59) was the king of Spain from 1746 until his death in 1759. His reign was 
characterized by numerous reforms aimed at modernizing Spain. ] 


CHAPTERI 55 


fattening on the very desolation of the country, to whose benefit their order 
had not, in the least, contributed.* Many of the benefices were, however, now 
filled by the secular clergy, according to the effort of Ferdinand VI. to remedy 
the vicious and abominable abuses of the regulars. It has been already stated 
to have been honoured with the seat of the archiepiscopal see; it had also all 
the minor dignities, while the Curas, or parish-priests, were to be found in 
all the sacerdotal dignity throughout the country. The inquisition!?? was also 
established in this as well as all the other American islands. 

The constitution of Hispaniola is not easily defined. The different towns 
were under the immediate direction of a sort of local municipality; but their 
power was very weak, and much infringed by the privileges of different bodies 
of the clergy. They confined themselves chiefly, therefore, to the minor com- 
mercial regulations of their own district, and even these were under the con- 
trol of a governor of the colony. The more important ends of general justice 
were administered by six more respectable judges, severally appointed, for 
civil and criminal jurisdiction, who formed one of the eleven Courts of Audi- 
ence distributed among the colonies, and which are a model of the Spanish 
Chancery. The decisions of these courts were subject to appeal to the Coun- 
cil of the Indies in Spain, except in civil cases, where the object of litigation 
did not amount, in value, to asum near fifteen hundred pounds. The vice-roy 
of New Spain represents the head of the government. The council over-ruled 
every department, civil and ecclesiastical, military and commercial, and has 
always preserved its dignity; with it originates every ordinance relative to the 
government of the colonies, which must be passed by the majority of a third 
of its members. At the head of this council the king is always understood to 
preside. There is also a commercial assembly for the purposes of an immedi- 
ate attention to all its objects which could not be affected by any other means. 
The local officers immediately below the whole of these, consist of the differ- 
ent commandants, and a variety of inferior officers of almost every descrip- 
tion; many of whose situations were sinecures, as valuable as the proprietors 
of the island were depreciated. 

Of the military force of the colony little can be said; for, except the garrison 
of St. Domingo, and a few posts established towards the line of demarcation, 
the regular soldiery distributed throughout the island were inconsiderable; 


“Though, by the ample provision which has been made for the American church, many 


of its members enjoy the ease and independence which are favourable to the cultivation of 
science, the body of secular clergy has hardly, during two centuries and a half, produced 
one author whose works contain such useful information, or possess such a degree of 
merit as to be ranked among those which attract the attention of enlightened nations.” — 
Robertson's Hist. Vol. IV. p. 50. 


56 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


nor could the militia, in which all capable of bearing arms were included, be 
said to produce an addition very effective. The principal ports along the line 
were those of Verettes, St. Michael, and St. Raphael. 

The different inhabitants of the Spanish colony were designated as fol- 
lows: —The pure Spaniards, who visited America for the purpose of employ- 
ment, and who always enjoyed every situation of power, were called Chape- 
tones. They looked down with disdain upon every other order of men. 

The second class of subjects were the Creoles, or descendants of Euro- 
peans settled in America. Though frequently deriving their pedigree from the 
noblest families in Spain, and possessing ample fortunes, yet the abjectness 
of political debasement—the enervation of indulgence in a warm climate, 
had subdued their minds, and subjected them to the vilest sloth. While the 
Chapetone amassed immense wealth, the Creole remained satisfied with his 
unimpaired patrimony; a determined hatred reigning between them. 

The third was the offspring of an European with an Indian, or a negro: the 
former, called Mulattoes, the latter Mestizos.? Of these, there was a con- 
siderable number in this, as in all the other Spanish settlements. In propor- 
tion as the number exceeded the colonies of other nations, from the early 
policy of encouraging an intermixture of the Spaniards with the natives, 
and from a greater indulgence of licentious intercourse. Among these there 
were a variety of different shades of colour, from the jet black of Africa, and 
the copper, or brown hue of America, to that of the European complexion. 
Those of the first and second generations, were considered not sufficiently 
removed, for distinction, from their parent race; in the third, the colour sen- 
sibly declined; and, in the fifth they embraced the characteristics and privi- 
leges of Europeans.'** The mechanic arts and active offices of society were 
left, by the proud and indolent Spaniards, to this robust and hardy race; who 
were lively, well-tempered, and frequently accomplished. 

The Negroes compose the fourth rank; of this singular, and important part of 
the human species, more will be found in another department of this work. In 
Hispaniola, as well as several other of the Spanish colonies, the Negroes were 
much used in domestic service, and for purposes of luxury. They were splen- 
didly dressed, and, in many respects, rendered so subservient to vanity, that 
they became themselves, more silly, vain, and imperious, than their masters.” 

However, the distinctions between Europeans and the people of colour 
were, by no means, kept up in the Spanish colonies as in those of other na- 
tions, except with regard to ecclesiastical establishments, to which they were 
not generally admitted. 


*The Indians in those of the Spanish colonies where they yet remain, form a fifth, and 
the most depressed class of inhabitants. 


CHAPTERI 57 


The Spanish coast is, in many parts, of a bold and rocky appearance, pre- 
senting high cliffs and extended promontories, and, in others, for many 
leagues, beautiful in the extreme, delighting the eye with an agreeable variety 
of hills, vallies, woods, and rivers. The generally luxurious face of the country 
continues the same throughout, with very little appearance of sterility even 
on the deserted north-east coast. The richest glades, with a most delightful 
foliage appear in the very bosoms of the mountains; and nothing can exceed 
the fertility of the cultivated lands, in every direction. The vast plain of Los 
Llanos, stretching along the south-east part of the island, is adapted to the 
growth of every tropical production, and, (abounding with rivers,) always 
capable of irrigation, as well as the Vega Real, which lies more towards the 
north, and through which flows the Yuna and the Cotuy, over a space of from 
fifty to an hundred miles; till meeting at a short distance from the coast, 
they discharge their united streams into the bay of Samana. On the northern 
coast, (by which Columbus first approached the island, ) is also a large tract of 
land which, though consigned to vast herds of wild cattle of various descrip- 
tions, exhibited its fertility, in the support of this object of commerce, as well 
as in several grass-farms, which lay to the northward line of demarcation. The 
present produce is sugar, ginger, cocoa, tobacco, cotton, indigo, maize, and 
the Cassava root, of which, what they could spare (with wood for dying,) 
was received by the mother-country. But their principal article of exportation 
was the hides of the horned-cattle, which ran wild in the plains, with no other 
guards than the names, or the marks of their owners: at length, they regarded 
the carcasses also, which being gladly received by their neighbours, they were 
found to be a valuable resource. Not confining themselves to horned-cattle, 
they furnished also great numbers of horses and mules, which required less 
trouble in their rearing, and were very acceptable to the French colony. 

The population, though an exact account may be deemed impossible, may, 
probably, approach to the statement of M. de Charmilly, at 60,000; the num- 
ber of whites was certainly greater than 2,000, and that of the negroes less 
than half the total number; the free race of mixed blood of different grades, 
composing the remainder.'*6 

The Spanish division of Hispaniola, affords every species of tropical herb, 
and beast; as, in this respect, it is similar to the western part of the island, 
they will be considered together. 

The French colony of St. Domingo, comprehended the whole of the terri- 
tory westward of the line of demarcation, before described: with fewer natu- 
ral advantages, it presented such a contrast to the inactivity of the neigh- 
bouring country, as procured for it a character almost equal to that which has 
been so generally given to the whole of the island at its discovery. This colony, 
of which we are able to give a more regular account, was divided, as indeed 


58 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


nature appears to have directed, into the northern, western, and southern 
provinces. The first of these extended about forty leagues along the northern 
coast, from the river Massacre to Cape St. Nicholas, and contained (including 
the island of Tortuga) twenty-six parishes. The principal towns and harbours 
were, Cape François, Fort Dauphin, Port Paix, and Cape St. Nicholas. 

The western province commenced at Cape St. Nicholas, and occupying 
the whole line of roadsted forming the Bight, or vast and general bay of Leo- 
gane, terminated at Cape Tiburon. It contained fourteen parishes, in which 
the chief towns were, Port-au-Prince, St. Marc, Leogane, Petit Goäve, and 
Jeremie; with the considerable villages of Gonaives, and Arcahaye. The best 
harbours are those of Port-au-Prince and Gonaives, the others are open and 
dangerous. 

The southern province occupied the remaining coast from Cape Tiburon 
to L'Anse a Pitre, (or rather the river of that name): of the ten parishes, there 
were but two chief towns, those of the Cayes!*? and Jacmel. Its roads and har- 
bours are dangerous; and the shipping off Aux Cayes are frequently obliged 
to take refuge in the bay des Flamands. 

The town of Cape Francois, in effect the capital of the colony, stands on a 
small plain, as it were, hollowed out of the Morne du Cap, a mountain which 
rises on both sides from the bay. The Morne, which allows only a narrow 
passage to the plain, is joined by the northern mountains, extending to Fort 
Picolet, which is placed on the edge of the rock, and defends the entrance to 
the roads; though built, in some respects, disadvantageously (except as re- 
garded its commodious bay, and sometimes experiencing an inconvenient 
closeness from the situation,) it had risen to a degree of elegance concordant 
to the importance of the island, and which might cope with many European 
cities of the first order and opulence. It was composed of upwards of thirty 
well-formed streets, which crossed each other at right angles, and were many 
of them elegant. The houses built of stone and brick, were frequently hand- 
some and commodious. It contained also two magnificent squares, those of 
Notre Dame and Clugny, ornamented with fountains; besides public shops, 
and long ranges of warehouses, suited to the commercial purposes to which 
this scene is dedicated. The principal public buildings after the church, which 
had not been erected many years, were the government-house, formerly a 
convent of Jesuits,“ the barracks, arsenal, playhouse, and prison. There were 


*His Royal Highness, the Duke of Clarence, was entertained in this building at the con- 
clusion of peace in 1783. [The Duke of Clarence (1765-1837) became King William IV after 
the death of George IV in 1830. He served in New York during the American Revolution- 
ary War. The Jesuits, or the Society of Jesus, are a religious order of the Catholic Church 
founded in 1534 by St. Ignatius of Loyola. They were very present in South America until 


CHAPTERI 59 


also, I believe, two hospitals of a similar nature to our own, and two of the 
establishments which Raynal calls houses of Providence. Whether the Hô- 
pital de la Charité (an alms or work-house), in the road to L’Haut du Cap, at 
a small distance from the town, was of this kind, I am not certain, though I 
believe it; they were, however, as Raynal observed, “truly pious and divine 
institutions;” being for the benefit of such Europeans as might remain in the 
colony destitute of resources, or who, before they had acquired by indus- 
try, an opportunity to procure subsistence, became subject to disorders often 
fatal. Males and females were separately taken care of, and nourished till they 
were disposed of in some employment in which they could help themselves. 
The theatre was supplied by a respectable company of comedians, who per- 
formed, with short intervals, all the year round, besides other exhibitions and 
entertainments. 

Fort Dauphin, about thirty miles from the cape, from whence there is an 
excellent road at a small distance from the shore, supplies the place of an an- 
cient town called Bayaha, which was situated at a greater distance from the 
coast: it was the last town on the eastern frontier of the French, and stands in 
the farthest recess of a spacious harbour, which has only one narrow outlet. 
It has a small river flowing by the village of Trou to the west, and the shore 
of Manchenillo bay to the east. The fort stands on a little peninsula to the 
north, and it is bounded on the south by the same luxurious and extensive 
plain which enhanced the riches of the town that has been just described. 
It was well fortified, and could have held out against a considerable force 
for some time. It had also a theatre well supplied, assemblies, and concerts. 
Though the greater part of the produce of the plain was carried to Cape 
François, Fort Dauphin had more than its share of contraband trade, with 
several advantages, derived from proximity to the forlorn part of the Spanish 
dominion. 

Port Paix stands on a worse situation than either of the preceding towns, 
from the former of which it is distant about forty miles. It was the first estab- 
lishment of the Buccaniers on the island, when, quitting the habits of free- 
booters, they began to form themselves into a more peaceable society. Port 
Paix is healthy, though a considerable swamp is not far distant, to the north- 
east; and every exertion of Agrarian industry has been exercised to its advan- 
tage, even to the erection of several well-planned aqueducts. Its retirement 
well adapting it to the purposes of contraband trade, to the great emolument 


they suffered a backlash for their political influence in all the principal Catholic countries 
of Europe. They were expelled from Portuguese, French, and Spanish colonies between 
1758 and 1770.] 


HAN of He Oly f Z Up A ANC a 


T DE LA Vike. 
DU 

CAP FRANCOIS. 
1785. 


e baon 
ee ee ee — ee 
Le tdpa t Katim Monidhenne pA es Loctite 29° 962 09 
SS ee AE 


| Momneed 44 


Plan of Cape François. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books 
and Manuscripts, Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State 
University Libraries. 


où d'etre lofie le Hevolution 4 


62 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


of the Americans, who frequented this port as well as the next, which forms 
the boundary of the northern province. 

The town of Cape St. Nicholas is situated on the sterile spot from which it 
derives its name, and which is considered the key to the windward passage, 
being directly opposite to the port of Maisi in Cuba. Its chief excellence is its 
harbour, which is capacious, and rendered perfectly secure by the mole, or 
peninsula, on the north-west, which, with the mountains on the north-east, 
form a bay nearly six miles long, sheltered from every wind. Behind, rise the 
mountains of the cape, which, altogether, renders it a place of a formidable 
appearance. It was rendered a free port'*? by the French in consequence of 
its unproductive quality, (as before mentioned,) and to allure residents, to 
whom the French ministry allied a colony of Acadians“° and Germans. 

Port-au-Prince was the ostensible metropolis of the French colony, and the 
seat of its government; except in time of war, when it was removed to Cape 
Francois. It must have been one of the unaccountable caprices that some- 
times direct the settlements of towns, that could have obtained for this place, 
indefensible at all points, the distinction it received. It was neither healthy 
nor inviting, though opulent, and well built, with every attention to conve- 
nience, but chiefly of wood. The water is of a brackish and otherwise dis- 
agreeable taste. It enjoyed, in common with the principal towns of the other 
provinces, the vicinity of a rich plain, the Cul de Sac, which contained no 
less than 150 sugar plantations, with every convenience for their advantage; 
while the mountains behind it, clothed with plantations of coffee, reached 
quite to the Spanish settlements at Riquille. The dreadful earthquake which 
happened in 1770, occasioned the town to be much enlarged and improved. 
There were many long and populous streets, but not handsome. A few pub- 
lic edifices ornamented situations, not the best calculated to receive them; 
among these, the residence of the intendant, and the theatre, were most con- 
spicuous. There are two harbours formed by some islets, open to any attack. 
The town extending along the sea-shore, in the centre of the western coast, 
is damp, and cheerless, except from the hurry of business. It is accessible at 
every point, from the land. A road, about 40 miles in length, reaches from 
hence to the village of Sale Trou, situated between two small rivers, near 
L'Anse a Pitre, on the southern coast. 

The town of St. Marc, stretching along the sea-shore at the bottom of the 
bay of that name, was rather handsomely built, of freestone from the hills, 
which form a crescent behind it; the only instance of that kind of building 
in the colony. It was not large, possessed a good trade, and received all the 
crops from the intervening country, to Cape St. Nicholas. It is within ten 
miles of the mouth of the great river Artibonite, which winds its serpentine 


CHAPTERI 63 


course through the plain to which it gives name, flowing behind it at the vil- 
lage of Tapion, about four leagues in the interior. Being the only river on the 
plain, an artificial use of water, by irrigation to a great extent, was necessary 
for its cultivation, which was an impediment to its opulence in contrast to 
those plains, which, (as was generally the case,) were watered by numerous 
streams or rivulets. 

Leogane stands about a mile and a half from the shore opposite the island, 
or peninsula, of Gonave, between the channel of Gonave and the bay of St. 
Marc; it is a spacious, handsome town, surrounded with fertility, and in the 
neighbourhood of many streams of excellent water. It is a situation capable 
of defence, and in many respects preferable to Port-au-Prince. It was here the 
seat of government was transferred from Goäve, previous to its settlement at 
the late capital. 

Petit Goäve, the original seat of government of the whole French colony, 
was long in a very decayed state, notwithstanding its importance in the first 
settlement of the Buccaniers, and the excellence of its harbour, still extremely 
good, and to which may be attributed any advantage it yet retains. 

L'Anse de Jeremie, or, La Grand Anse, is a thriving town, well situated, 
healthy, and neat. Its trade was forming in a manner that left no doubt of in- 
creasing opulence, and to it, the privateers generally brought the prizes they 
made, in its neighbourhood. 

The village of Gonaives is situated on the south side of the bay of that name, 
immediately opposite the projecting point of the line of demarcation, so that 
the French colony in this part, (nearly the centre of their territory,) contained 
in breadth little more than twenty miles. The soil is the most productive, and 
the most grateful to man, of any spot in the whole of the Antilles. Its harbour 
was excellent in point of safety, being formed by a little island, which crossing 
the bay, left a narrow channel, but with sufficient depth of water. 

Aux Cayes is completely sunk in marshy ground, without a harbour, or salu- 
brity to recommend it; yet such is the fertility which every where surrounds 
this town, as to have tempted the choice of every new settler to its swampy 
shores, and stagnant ponds. Its population was, therefore, much greater than 
could have been supposed. It has also in its vicinity a variety of bays and vil- 
lages, which all tend to its prosperity. — Many ships have been lost here, from 
the insecure and dangerous anchorage; yet, as the Abbé Raynal has observed, 
“even the caprices of industry are to be indulged by the government;” and 
“trade like a plant that only flourishes in a soil of its own choosing, disdains 
every kind of restraint.” 1“ Vache Island, which lies off this coast, was a cele- 
brated resort of the freebooters in their molestation of the Spaniards, and is 
yet the successful haunt of the privateers of an enemy. 


64 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


To this island, as to that of Tortuga on the opposite coast, the colony was 
indebted for the foundation of a town, which, though small, is of some im- 
portance. Jacmel, at the best of times, did not contain one hundred houses, 
and derives no support from its soil, which is not fruitful, and comparatively 
hid among the neighbouring hills. As Port-au-Prince is to L'Anse à Pitre, so 
is Jacmel to Le Petit Goäve, being situated on the opposite side of the south 
projection of the Bight, sometimes called the Bight of Leogane. It is there- 
fore a kind of store-house, or magazine, to the colony, receiving safely during 
war, (which can be done at no other place,) assistance of every kind, which 
is easily communicated to the western side, by a road of only twenty miles, 
leading to Leogane, and from thence to Port-au-Prince. 

Besides the towns, and the villages of Gonaives and Arcahaye already men- 
tioned, there are numerous others to which either commerce, agriculture, 
beauty, or strength of situation, attached important advantages; among these 
may be ranked St. Louis, which, though poor, and containing a small num- 
ber of houses, without even water to drink, till some Jews, in return for their 
safety, proposed to erect, at their own expence, an aqueduct; by being occu- 
pied in some of the purposes of government, receiving the men of war which 
appeared there, and thus protecting the trade and wealth of Aux Cayes, it as- 
sumed the characteristic of a defence of the island. Baynette, about fifteen 
miles from Jacmel, and Acul, at a less distance from Aux Cayes, derive a simi- 
lar adventitious importance, as well as Nipes and Miragoane, on the oppo- 
site coast; while Cul de Sac, Petit Fond, and Plaisance, in the interior, are of 
a different character. To these many more might be added upon the north- 
ern coast, but enough hath been said to shew the different appearance of the 
French colony from that of Spain: suffice it to add, that every part teemed 
with population, and smiled with industry. 

The cultivated land in the colony amounted to 2,289,480 English acres,“ 
which was divided into 793 plantations of sugar, 3,117 of coffee, 789 of cot- 
ton, 3,160 of indigo, 54 of cocoa or chocolate, and 623 smaller settlements for 
raising grain, yams, and other vegetable food.t 

Of the differences which agitated the two colonies, happily religion did not 
form an object; for, though exempt from the interference of Rome, on one 
part, by express concession, and, on the other, by a light administration of 
ecclesiastical government, they both acknowledged the forms of her church, 
and entertained all the appendages of her hierarchy. The order of Jesuits was 


*Or 763,923 carreaux of French measurement. [The carreau was a unit of surface mea- 
sure specific to the West Indies in the ancien régime. It equals about 3.18 acres. ] 

This last statement, which has every mark of authenticity, is taken from Mr. Edwards, 
Hist. Surv. p. 136. 


CHAPTERI 65 


obtained here; that able, though insidious body, which, separated from secu- 
lar projects and political intrigues, might have become benefactors to the 
human race. More need not be said of the local establishments of religion in a 
colony, whose inhabitants counted really but little upon it, and whose writers 
have told us still less.* The edifices of public worship did not, in elegance of 
building, detract any other, and that there were many excellent benefices, 
might be collected from the manner in which many of the ecclesiastics have 
been known to live. 

The government of the French colony was composed of two principal offi- 
cers, a governor-general, and an intendant, or general administrator, whose 
office lasted three years. They were appointed through the marine minister, 
and their power was unbounded; for they, in effect, enacted laws, filled all 
vacant offices, and presided ultimately over all councils, or courts of justice. 
The governor had the whole naval and military force under his command, 
and had the power of personal liberty throughout the colony. He had also 
the power, by certain impediments, to prevent arrest by any other authority, 
and in part to stop the course of justice. The intendant regulated and super- 
intended every department relative to the public revenue: to this he had the 
occasional assistance of a court ridiculously enough called the Colonial As- 
sembly, in which every superior public officer bore a part. A subordinate 
court of justice was placed at Port-au-Prince, for the provinces. The principal 
officers presided in it, with a president, twelve counsellors, and four assis- 
tant judges. In this court, which was formerly divided between that town and 
Cape Frangois, were registered all the royal edicts, and those of the colonial 
government. Much, very much of the happiness of the colony, depended on 
the governor, who was generally a person of distinction, and most frequently 
selected from the army or navy. An appeal from every decision lay to the king, 
in which justice was insured; whatever impediments to its course might have 
been found in St. Domingo. 

The chief force of the island, though certainly inadequate to its defence, 
consisted of the militia, of which each parish raised from one to three com- 
panies of whites, one of mulattoes, and one of free blacks, none of which re- 
ceived pay; and the king’s troops upon the colonial establishment generally 
comprised from two to three thousand men. 

The inhabitants were composed, as usual, of pure whites; people of col- 
our,” and blacks of free condition; and negroes in a state of slavery. The 
whole of the intermediate grades were called generally mulattoes. 


“Except the tales of some fanatics among the French missionaries, with whom many of 
the slaves are described as “spiritual,” though it is sufficiently known that these people, in 
a state of slavery, neither comprehend, nor retain, even the forms of Christian worship. 


66 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


The character of the European planter in St. Domingo was imperious, and 
voluptuous to a higher degree than in the other islands: this character also 
shewed itself on every occasion; he was impatient of even the constraint of 
the laws, avaricious of wealth and honor, and a devotee to all the arts of in- 
dulgence. Hospitality was unbounded among them, and charity, at the same 
time, very extensively bestowed. “’Tis the inheritance,’ says Father le Pers,” 
“which they have preserved the most entire from their ancestors; and it 
would seem that this excellent virtue was conferred with the very air of St. 
Domingo.” 

Many circumstances combined to render the situation of the mulattoes 
much more eligible than in any other island, though in some respects worse. 
They were also more numerous.“*? The free man of colour had the command 
of his own property, without any restriction, both in life and death; he could 
bear testimony even against the whites; he could marry as he pleased, and 
transmit freedom to his children; and he might embrace a liberal profession; 
but prejudice frequently damped his efforts, and precipitated him below 
what an hostile law could have done. The meanness of birth was never for- 
gotten in his own land. They were also compelled to serve in one of the bri- 
gades of horse, furnished in all the parishes, under the appellation of the 
Marshalsea.** The numbers of this class were to be accounted for, by several 
circumstances, amongst which were the superior comforts of the lower order 
of whites,’ employed in the superintendence of the plantations, and the en- 
gaging manners of the women of colour, who are often elegant, if not some- 
times really beautiful. 

The next class, the enslaved negro, appears to have been comparatively 
happy, rather than otherwise; not condemned to an unreasonable duration 
of labor, they were sufficiently provided, without any anxiety for their future 
existence. They had gardens which produced the necessaries of life; pigs, 
poultry, and even horses; and were sufficiently clothed, agreeably to the cli- 
mate; but they were considered and treated, as much beneath, the ordinary 
class of human beings: yet, M. de Charmilly, whose judgment in this particu- 
lar need not to be doubted, says, “that this race of men is naturally good; that 
if nature has denied them attention, reflexion, observation, perseverance, 
and all the advantages which render the whites superior to them, she has 
done every thing for them necessary to the climate in which they exist, not 
only in physical advantages, but also in those of the heart; for she has given 
that sensibility for the sex which makes them forget so many sorrows, and the 


“L'héritage qu'ils ont conservé le plus entier de leurs pères, c'est l'hospitalité; il semble 
qu'on respire cette belle vertu avec l'air de S. Domingue.” Charlevoix Hist. de S. Domingue. 


CHAPTERI 67 


most lively affection for their children, which renders every thing support- 
able to them.” 

The appearance which we have already ascribed to the Spanish coast, may 
be naturally supposed to extend itself to that French division, with the differ- 
ence which must be created by a continual range of cultivation, either glis- 
tening in a tropical sun, or winding in an umbrageous alley towards dwell- 
ings which might be easily conceived a second paradise. The Mole of Cape 
St. Nicholas, which is justly considered as a key to the windward passage, 
presents an appearance such as it should to the ocean, sterile and command- 
ing. The south peninsula resounded with the language of trade, and the north- 
ern coast with arms and with agriculture.— Unlike their neighbours, the 
French colonists caused their land to be cultivated up to the very mountain 
tops, from which the cane-grounds appeared as so many thickets; while every 
invention that could be adopted to their purpose was readily encouraged. 
Their roads were in general excellent, being made and kept in repair, by the 
contributions of every planter, who sent a proportionate number of his slaves 
to work upon them, (a burthen entitled the Corvées.)“° Sometimes they over- 
flowed in the morning, and were dusty again in the evening; although gener- 
ally shaded on both sides by lime trees; and the different grounds were sepa- 
rated by hedges of citron trees. The approach to the residence of a planter, 
was through an avenue of both these, and the pimento and palm graced its 
extended prospect. 

Their principal rivers are the Artibonite, which flows from its source in 
the centre of the island, through the plain of that name, till it empties itself 
in the gulf of Gonaves; that called the Three Rivers, whose mouth is at Port 
Paix; and the Great River, or La Grande Riviére, which reaches the sea near 
Jeremie. 

To describe the productions of the French colony of St. Domingo, would 
be enumerating those of the whole of the Antilles. Their principal were, how- 
ever, as have been before described, sugar, coffee, cotton, indigo, and cocoa, 
or chocolate. To these may be added a little tobacco. 

In return for the useful droves of cattle for slaughter and labour, smoked 
beef, bacon, skins, and the greatest part of the money received from Spain, 
they supplied their neighbours with wearing apparel, hardware, and guns. 


* —“Que cette race d'hommes est naturellement bonne; que si la nature lui a refusé 
Yattention, la réflexion, l'observation, la persévérance, & tous les avantages qui rendent 
les blancs supérieurs a eux, elle a tout fait pour eux du cété du climat, des avantages phy- 
siques & méme du coeur; car elle leur a donné cette sensibilité pour les femmes qui fait 
oublier tant de malheurs! et le plus vif amour pour leurs enfans, qui leur rend tout sup- 
portable!” —Venault de Charmilly, Lettre a M. Bryan Edwards, &c. p.41. 


68 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


The population was considered at about 40,000 whites, 500,000 negro 
slaves, and 24,000 free people of colour; and the average exports, as stated 
by M. Marbois, “7 the intendant of the colony, amounted to 4,765,129 I. ster- 
ling.“8 

It is not intended in this place, to satisfy the scientific views of the natu- 
ralist in regard to St. Domingo, notwithstanding that, with an inclination to 
that study, the writer had some opportunities for its indulgence, which were 
not entirely lost, but reserved for some future opportunity. The amateur of 
this elegant research will, no doubt, have recourse to the valuable histories 
which have been long furnished of a neighbouring island,’ in these respects 
so similar, as to admit of very little variation in the subject to which I allude. 

The food of the early inhabitants of St. Domingo, appears to have com- 
prised a similar description of vegetables to that of the negroes at this day: — 


plantains, Indian wheat,!° 


millet, the cassavi root, potatoes, and Caribbee 
cabbage."' Their quadrupeds included the smaller species of a lizard, yet, the 
delicacy of a West India table; the Agouti Rat, of which a description are yet 
found in some of the islands; and the Alco, a small short-tailed dog, which did 
not bark, with others whose names have not come down to us. Their fishery 
was more abundant, every bay and creek furnishing an ample supply, as many 
of them do to the present time. The European quadrupeds now supply the 
necessary food of European colonists, with only such local additions as are 
objects of delicacy, or introduced by custom; among these, may be named 
the land crab, the ortolan,’** and a variety of wild fowl of delicious taste and 
flavor. The indigenous vegetables yet remain, including plantains, yams, a 
species of spinach, potatoes, cassava, Indian wheat, and cabbage; to these 
are added the European roots, herbs, and pulse;’*? and no want is found of 
cabbage, turnips, carrots, parsnips, peas, beans, artichokes, &c. A variety of 
fruits ornament the luxury of the table, among which, the melon and pine- 
apple, peaches and strawberries, oranges and lemons, the cashew, apples, 
pears, plums, and nuts, are plenteously combined with a variety of produc- 
tions introduced from different countries. 

To describe the nature, properties, and mode of cultivation of those pro- 
ductions, which form the different objects of commerce, would uselessly ex- 
tend the present chapter, and the accounts are to be found in different works 
peculiarly appropriated to these subjects.” Sufficient is now already men- 


“Sugar, coffee, and cotton, are rendered familiar to almost every reader. I shall, how- 
ever, briefly add here a slight description of the two other staple commodities of St. 
Domingo — cocoa and indigo. 

The cocoa-tree presents less beauty than utility to its cultivator, for its branches form so 
many trunks separating from each other to a distance immediately above the parent one, 


CHAPTERII 69 


tioned to acquaint the reader with the country, from whose rich prospects, 
and cloudless sky, he is to turn to scenes of conflagration, and the horrors of 


Massacre. 


CHAP. II. 
Origin of the Revolutionary Spirit of this Period in St. Domingo. 


THE origin of principles is not always to be traced to the approximating 
causes of an event; for, as in nature, so in morality, the seeds of many produc- 
tions lie dormant through varying seasons, till the moment when an unseen 
influence calls them into obvious existence: hence, to be capable of discern- 
ing the signs of the times, is a power that hath always been duly appreciated, 


and these bend with their separate branches immediately down to the earth. It seldom, 
therefore, rises high. Its leaves are long, terminating in a point, and emitting an agreeable 
smell. In the pistil of a flower blooming from every part, is contained an husk, in the form 
of a melon, which grows ordinarily to the length of six inches, and the breadth of four or 
five, composed of several small inclosures, in which the fruit, comprising a number of 
small nuts, of the shape of almonds, is found. It is propagated from the seed; is green in 
the early part of its growth, and becomes yellow at maturity. When it assumes a deep hue, 
it must be immediately gathered and dried; two crops of equal value are annually formed. 
It requires shade and moisture, and loves the protection of large trees at a sufficient dis- 
tance, which must be also regarded with respect to its own plants. It requires rather due 
care, and a few necessary precautions, than a culture either laborious or expensive, and 
its returns are of the most profitable kind. Its nutritious, and other advantageous quali- 
ties, are too sufficiently known to require a recital, and its commercial value will be better 
known from other parts of the present account. 

Indigo, an article of such general domestic service, as to be used as a beautifier of the 
finest part of our dress, and an important object of commerce, flourishes nowhere so well 
as at St. Domingo. It is a shrub with a thick, spreading root, about two feet high, of a faint, 
but not disagreeable smell. The stem is of a dry appearance, and different shades of colour. 
The leaves are of an oval form, and connected by a short pedicle. The pistil of its small and 
scentless flowers changes into a pod, and discloses its seeds, of the appearance of gun- 
powder. The blue is found adhering to the leaves, which, when gathered on the branches, 
are thrown into a tub filled with water, and fermented: it is then made to run into another, 
when it is discovered among the water, in the form of a subtile earth. The water is then 
agitated by various means, and with the utmost circumspection, to combine the coloured 
particles, which, when effected, are left to precipitate to the bottom. The liquid, become 
of a thicker consistence, is drawn off into another vessel to settle, and thence drained 
through sacks, from which it is removed into chests, where it becomes dry, and fit for sale. 
It is divided into two sorts, whimsically designated the true and the bastard. The first is 
finer, but the latter heavier and more profitable, and therefore more generally cultivated. 


70 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


and an attention to which hath frequently changed the fate of a country, if 
not of mankind. Yet, it is not often that man can be hoped to distinguish with 
precision, the approaching evil from the good, particularly in circumstances 
that affect, perhaps, not only his interest, but his immediate happiness; it is 
thus, therefore, that surprize is so frequently excited, at the apparent blind- 
ness to the future with which principles and practices are so frequently urged 
in society, diametrically opposite to the dictates of nature and philosophy, 
and repugnant to the common experience of ages. Collateral circumstances 
form the general argument in their favor; and it may endure with them a little 
while; but truth is eternal. 

If accuracy of discrimination is not always to be found in philosophers, it 
is not to be expected in any large mixed body; and still less so, in those who 
form the population of colonies, particularly of the extent of that which is the 
subject of the present observations. Though the greatest empires have arisen 
from the overflow of cities into colonies, it cannot be contended that no fecu- 
lence’ mixed with the flood. 

To attribute to the general number of colonists any specific character, 
(where, collected fortuitously, they must necessarily admit of the strongest 
marks of variety), would be ridiculous; it is, however, certain, that among 
those, devoted to pursue fortune in distant dependencies upon their native 
country, may be ranked many who have no peculiar capacity, nor opportu- 
nity for employment at home; many of the higher classes without prospects, 
and of the lower without character; who cannot fail to consider their destina- 
tion, as intended to supply every want; and to consider those means the best, 
which have the most facility. To those may, no doubt, be added many of the 
germs of genius, to whom, it is to be feared, the warmth of a tropical sun does 
not always prove more genial, than the wintry rays of their own; and, prob- 
ably, some with qualities fitted for any sphere of life, to whom a spirit of enter- 


They are both liable to frequent accidents, among which the most destructive is the effect 
of the caterpillar, which devours the leaves, and their produce, in a few mornings. It is 
quickly ripe, and generally cut at intervals of six weeks. At the end of two years it becomes 
degenerated, and fresh plants are necessary. Moisture and shade are required considerably 
for this plant, and the principal care is to deprive it of the weeds, which would otherwise 
immediately choke it. It exhausts the soil considerably, and potatoes, and other similar 
plants, are cultivated in its place occasionally, for the purpose of burning the leaves as 
manure. 

Those who would enjoy an acute and curious dissertation on sugar, may consult the 
interesting account of Dr. Moseley, in his volume of Medical Miscellanies, &c. [Benjamin 
Moseley (1742-1819) worked as a surgeon-apothecary in Kingston, Jamaica, beginning 
in 1768 and later held the post of surgeon-general there. Among other works, he wrote 
A Treatise on Sugar (1800). ] 


CHAPTER II 71 


prize alone might dictate the migration. To the self-interested, the term of his 
own probation will always bound his considerations, and it is not the bulk of 
mankind who can be, nor who incline to be, legislators, much less moralists. 
The officers of government may be able and good, but their dominion is too 
short to conciliate any local affection, and an expedient temporization will 
and must always supersede even ordinary virtue. 

Ofthe West India colonists from France, the modern writers of that nation 
have afforded us no reason to think with increased tenderness, since Raynal 
has imputed to them a viciousness of conduct, beyond the apparent bounds 
of human actions; and De Charmilly (one of themselves) has described those, 
of whom the best conduct was to be expected, receiving appointments under 
the government of the colony, as the rewards of an intriguing court to its 
meanest dependants, and vilest accessaries! Their character, as displayed on 
prominent occasions, during that period which is the intent of these sheets to 
describe, unhappily was not often such as to controvert the assertions made 
from such good authority. 

The man who first contemplated the purchase of laborers by thousands,” to 
be conveyed in close vessels, without the power of rest or exercise, or nourish- 
ment proper for any situation, much less for a dreary voyage to a foreign land; 
and, who knew these men, although little removed from a state of nature, to 
be susceptible of those impressions which mock the utmost refinements of 
civilization, to the attainment of some of which, morality often strives in vain; 
must have been bold to conceive that they would continue always patient of 
their wrongs, and resigned to compulsory labour, even though it should be 
in a state of comparative advantage, particularly in the constant converse 
of annual acquisitions of their countrymen, whose remembrances were not 


*The commencement of the African slave-trade, like many other objects of importance, 
seems to have taken place from a very trifling accident. In 1440, Anthony Gonsales, one 
of the Portuguese navigators, in the prosecution of his discoveries, seized, and carried off 
some Moors near Cape Bojador, whom prince Henry afterwards ordered him to restore. 
When again exploring the coast of Africa about two years after, he executed this order, 
landing them at Rio del Oro, and received from the Moors, in exchange, ten blacks, and a 
quantity of gold dust. His success in this transaction tempted his countrymen to a repeti- 
tion, till at length they fitted out ships for the purpose, and afterwards formed settlements 
for the trade in black slaves. Ultimately patents were granted, and the dealers in human 
flesh were sanctified by a bull from the holy see. [Antäo Gongalves was the first Euro- 
pean to buy Africans as slaves. Rainsford’s account is rather fanciful. Goncalves bought an 
Azengue Berber chieftain and 11 other slaves from black slave traders on the West African 
coast. He returned a few years later (there is no indication that Prince Henry the Naviga- 
tor ordered him to return) and traded the chieftain for more slaves, gold dust, and ostrich 
eggs. In 1452 Pope Nicholas V issued the papal bull Dum Diversas, which granted Afonso V 
of Portugal the right to conquer and enslave Saracens and pagans. | 


72 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


obliterated; yet no objection would appear to have occurred to him, and his 
plan proceeded till the employers of it, with a physical proportion of twelve 
to one against them, imagined themselves capable of coercing five hundred 
thousand of these men, exclusive of the descendants of others, without any 
determined exertion of virtue, or consideration on their own part. 

Let it not be conceived that it is here intended to arraign the conduct of the 
planters in general, or to view with complacency the revolt of servants of any 
description, much less to plead their apology; I am but to state facts which 
are necessary to the argument intended to be produced. 

The African negro is described as “frivolous, inconstant, vain, timid, jeal- 
ous, and superstitious; yet good and generous, without foresight, always 
guided by the impression of the moment; and adding to these characteristics, 
the vices of slaves, indolence, gluttony, dishonesty, and falsehood; vindictive 
also, like all weak beings, injustice driving them to despair.”* I take the whole 
of this character for granted, from the experience of the writer, and the dif- 
ferent opportunities which have been confided to him of judging with truth. 
That the dependance of colonies, then, could have been originally placed 
upon such beings, was a strange perversion of human judgment; but that it 
could be expected to continue through ages, without a superior portion of 
human wisdom and virtue, (instead of a very small exercise of either,) is only 
attributable to the blindness I have just described. The result has proved the 
position; for, from the first moment at which African slaves were imported, 
the effects of all the bad qualities ascribed to them have been frequent, in re- 
volt, treachery, murder, and suicide; nor, at the same time, have the instances 
been few, of actions arising from the superior impulses, or unconquerable af- 
fection, gratitude, inviolable fidelity, or bravery, have been experienced from 
them by their masters and connections; and circumstances are still recited 
that might cope with the history of the ancient republics. No more is de- 
scribed than is necessary to the present purpose; for it is not the wish of the 
writer to discuss the question of the slave-trade,’° already too much agitated 
in this country, but to trace the origin of the revolutionary spirit which has 
ended so fatally to the colonies of France. 

Regardless of the frequent exercise of several minor qualities also which 
must tend to render men impatient of slavery, the labour of the islands con- 
tinued to be performed by their means; without any other foresight, than 
related to expedients which might procrastinate the evil for each successive 


*— “légers, inconstans, vains, timides, peureux, jaloux, bons, généreux, sans prévoy- 
ance, superstitieux, toujours conduits par l'impression du moment: ils joignent à cela les 
vices des esclaves: paresseux, gourmands, voleurs, menteurs, vindicatifs, commes tous les 
êtres, faibles, l'injustice les désespère” De Charmilly, Lettre, p. 41. 


CHAPTERII 73 


proprietor. Hence they have been successively punished by domestic means, 
chased as wild-beasts, combated like a foreign enemy, and treated with as in- 
dependent powers! Yet, so prone are men to consider that what they wish the 
case, that scarcely a doubt was entertained of those who had not deserted, or 
marooned," nor were any other than coercive principles contemplated for 
those who remained; the same routine of purchase to supply deficiencies, 
and of regulations to secure their value, prevailed. The planter, instead of ex- 
hibitions of virtue and power that should impress respect and awe, appeared 
a feeble voluptuary, forgetting, in idle dalliance with the female labourers of 
his field, the utility of moral principles, and the decencies of life. The effects 
of such examples are incontestable, as regards private morality, without any 
allusion to the offices of religion; and it requires not to be depressed into 
a community of the most abject description of slaves to discover, that the 
effects of vice in undermining public virtue is the certain basis of revolt. 

Thus an ignorance, in the first instance, of human nature, a blindness to 
actual circumstances, and a want of individual virtue in the colonists, gave 
birth to the revolutionary spirit in St. Domingo; which, instead of being cre- 
ated, was only fanned into flame by the occurrences which took place in the 
relations of the colony, with the mother-country, on the change of its govern- 
ment. 

The support of colonies by means of such a disproportion of African slaves, 
to the other population as are necessary, continually and progressively ac- 
quired, is radically impossible, from the nature of the people themselves, and 
the manner of obtaining them; but if it were not, the want of powers required 
for their management —of a policy sufficiently subtle and yet enlightened, 
for their government, would render it, permanently, impracticable; even 
with both these probabilities in their favour, that, in such a depraved state 
as that of the French colony in St. Domingo, every other advantage would be 
annihilated.” 

It is, perhaps, necessary here to anticipate an observation not unlikely to 
be made; therefore, be it understood, that the impossibility of the continued 
existence of slavery is not by any means asserted.” It is not forgotten that there 
was a period when, from the happy state under which this subject is now con- 
sidered, unrestricted by the check of civil or ecclesiastical tyranny, parents 
sold their children as slaves to a foreign country, and inherited others them- 
selves, who were their captives, or who had been acquired by other means; 


“See an account of slavery in Europe in Robertson’s Charles V. vol. I. p. 272. —Also an 
assemblage of the different laws on this subject, in Huntingford’s Laws of Master and Servant 
Considered, chap. I. p. 36. 


74 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


but these, notwithstanding they may have been treated as inferior classes of 
society (as the productive power is too generally to this day), bore no mark,” 
by which they should be considered, as distinguished by nature to be scarcely 
belonging to the human species, as is the case with that of complexion. 

Nor, is the writer at present opposing the practice of the slave-trade. He 
is an enemy to it, only, as he is to every employment which offers an undue 
power to many, not the most unlikely to abuse it; and as a principle hostile 
to humanity and inefficient in its purposes. He is aware, that the situation of 
colonial-slaves at present is, in many respects, superior to that of the labour- 
ers or the artizans of Britain. The first have not, indeed, the command of se- 
cession, neither have the two latter the power; for if they cease from labour, 
they cease from its advantages. When it is considered that the artizan must 
wander in search of employment, and submit to the optional reward of those 
who may chuse to employ him, after encountering distress in consequence 
of repeated refusals; the slave will appear more happy, though sometimes 
enduring corporeal punishment too severe, whose food and residence is pro- 
vided without anxiety; and who is certain of employment, or of the same pro- 
vision. 

Nor, would the writer be supposed to sanction the means which have been 
used to procure an abolition of the trade, which he disapproves; much less, 
the emancipation of those slaves already in the colonies. Of the latter step, the 
humanity would be equally problematical, with that which would dictate the 
liberation of the poor bird long nursed in domestic comfort, to flutter a little 
while in solitary freedom, a stranger to his own kind, and to the winds of 
heaven. 

What has been said, has arisen from a conviction that, but for the circum- 
stances described, a revolutionary spirit would not have so soon been spread 
throughout St. Domingo; and to point out the beacon to the colonies of the 
British nation in the same sea, "8 with that which has produced an illustration 
of these positions, and a picture so full of terror, on this more will be said, and 
with greater propriety, at the end of this work. 

Flushed with opulence and dissipation, the majority of planters in St. 


“Tt is recorded, but where I cannot, at present, refer, that St. Gregory observing some 
beautiful English children in the slave-market at Rome, exclaimed in a Latin pun, if I may 
be allowed the expression, that they were not English, but Angels, if they had but been 
Christians. — “Non Angli, sed Angeli,” &c. This practice will, however, appear to have been 
continued after they had the benefit of the Christian Religion. See Anderson’s History of 
Commerce, vol. I. p. 99. [According to the Venerable Bede, Pope Gregory I responded to 
this sight by sending St. Augustine of Canterbury to convert the English. Adam Anderson, 
An historical and chronological deduction of the origin of commerce (1764).] 


CHAPTERII 75 


Domingo had arrived at a state of sentiment the most vitiated, and manners 
equally depraved; while, injured by an example so contagious, the slaves had 
become more dissolute, than those of any British island. If the master was 
proud, voluptuous, and crafty, the slave was equally vicious, and often riot- 
ous; the punishment of one was but the consequence of his own excesses; but 
that of the other, was often cruel and unnatural. The proprietor could bear no 
rival in his parish; and would not bend even to the ordinances of justice. The 
creole-slaves looked upon the newly-imported Africans with scorn, and sus- 
tained, in their turn, that of the mulattoes, whose complexion was browner; 
while all were kept at a distance from the intercourse of the whites. Nor did 
the boundaries of sex, it is painful to observe, keep their wonted distinction, 
from the stern impulses that affect men. The European ladies too often par- 
ticipated in the austerity and arrogance of their male kindred; while the jet- 
black beauty, among slaves, though scarcely a native of the island, refused all 
commerce with those who could not boast the same distinction with herself. 

Such was the situation of the inhabitants of St. Domingo in the beginning 
of the year 1789, prompt to any movement that should create an efferves- 
cence among them, or afford the one party an opportunity of opposing the 
other; yet, while private feuds were eager for an opportunity to burst into 
public clamour, the situation of the country was such as hath been described, 
like the verdant bosom of a volcano, unconscious of the flame about to burst; 
the people were cheerful, the markets plentifully stocked, the lands loaded 
with production, and the colony, if “overwhelmed with debt,” it may be ad- 
mitted to be so said, flourishing every where. 

In the mean time, the great kingdom, under whose care it had expanded to 
its present growth, and to whose government it yet looked for parental care, 
disordered by embarrassment, and agitated by conflicting interests, began to 
approach to that period which had been considered as inevitable, by philoso- 
phers, for more than half a century. Notwithstanding the absolute tyranny 
which had prevailed in other respects, France, under the feeble reign of the 
unhappy Louis,’*® had been the nurse of morality and philosophy; and she 
drew nigh, not unwittingly, to that political mortality to which it would ap- 
pear all states are subject; for it had been sung by her poets under the walls of 
her own capital, and repeated in auguries which did not err.!$° 

Of the different expedients that had been resorted to, the colonies did not 
want information; nor did it fail in the effect which might be expected upon 


*— “la colonie qui, ayant encore beaucoup de dettes, n’avait pas besoin de payer celles de 
la France.” Lettre a Edwards, p. 48. [“the colony which, yet being overwhelmed with debt, 
did not need to have to pay France’s.”] 


76 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


every class of their inhabitants. In a new regimen the proprietors looked to 
some aggrandizement either in property or consequence; the free people of 
colour anticipated a favourable change in their condition; and even the slaves 
viewed, through the political alterations that began to occupy the attention 
of those above them, something to excite their curiosity, and a vigilance to 
gratify it. Each motion of the French court became canvassed by every class 
throughout the island. When a spirit of deliberation upon subjects usually 
considered above the capacities of the vulgar begins to spread, it seldom ends 
precisely as it begun; whatever may be the event, it does not fail to call into 
notice circumstances and opinions not easily repressed, and characters in 
their support who might otherwise have preserved through life “the noise- 
less tenor of their way.” #1 It had its full effect in St. Domingo, already so ripe 
to receive it; and when the news arrived that the States-General of France’ 
were to be summoned (the last convulsive effort of expiring monarchy), all 
parties resolved on making their own interests a part of the general concern. 

In opposition to the wishes of a judicious few (among whom was the in- 
telligent De Charmilly) and even to the prohibitions of the government, the 
impetuous proprietors summoned provincial and parochial meetings, for 
the purpose of electing themselves to legislative functions; heated resolutions 
were passed; and eighteen deputies were elected, to represent the island in 
the meeting of the States-General, without any other authority than the noise 
of demagogues, and their own inclinations. Twelve were never recognized 
in France, and the other six were received with difficulty.°* The mulattoes, 
who could have no share in this self-created body, thought it naturally time 
to show an attention to themselves; and, accordingly, not only communicated 
with numbers of their brethren then resident in the mother country, but aug- 
mented those powerful advocates in their behalf, with much more effect than 
was produced by the self-created body of colonial deputies.’** The negroes, 
however, more successful than all, without either deputies or intercessors, 
obtained, unsolicited, the interest of such a powerful body in their behalf, 
as to drown the recollection of every other object. A society, in which were 
enrolled the names of several great and good men, under the title of “The 
Friends of the Blacks” (Amis de Noirs),’©° circulated its protests and appeals 
with such vigour, that, before the negroes themselves, although eager and 
alert in their enquiries, were acquainted with the importance which they had 
obtained in the deliberations of the mother country, they were the prominent 
subjects of conversation and regret in half the towns of Europe. They were 
not, however, tardy in acquiring this information; and though it would be 
difficult to contemplate any thing in human nature so bad, as to suppose that 
the highest and best of motives did not actuate so respectable a body as that 


CHAPTER III 77 


which composed this society, or the similar establishment which had before 
obtained in London; yet the unhappy eloquence with which the miseries 
of slavery were depicted by them, and the forcible points of view in which all 
the errors of their opponents were placed, as well as the enthusiasm which 
always accompanies the exertions of ardent minds, were certainly the cause 
of bringing into action, on a broad basis, that spirit of revolt which only sleeps 
in the enslaved African, or his descendant, and which has produced on their 
side, and on that of the white inhabitants of the colonies, such horrors as 
“make ev’n the angels weep.” ©” 

Thus concludes this account of the origin of the revolution of St. Domingo, 
with observing how much better it would have been for themselves, and per- 
haps for humanity, if happily discerning the signs of the times, the planters 
of this delightful and flourishing colony (a character which none have at- 
tempted to deny it), by resigning an overweening fondness for dominion, and 
an undue avarice of gain, had rather calmed than provoked the dissentions 
of those whose interest should have bid them to agree; and by softening the 
evils of a state which is so bad in its best form, have conciliated the affections 
of those to whose labours, under the present regimen, every thing productive 
of wealth or prosperity must depend. A partial concession to those who, by 
complexion itself, claim half a right to political existence, would have been 
sufficient: with a little regard for the morals of a people who require them 
the most, and a revolution in their own minds, as far as human nature will 
admit. These would have preserved to them, now lingering in a melancholy 
exile, if not the sudden victims of their impolicy, an island the boast of the 
new world, and a powerful support of the old. If they had then contemplated 
some more legitimate means of prosecuting the labours of their colony, they 
might, however immediately unavailing, have laid a foundation for their pos- 
terity more lasting than the bequest of inordinate wealth, and have claimed 
the approbation of society. 


CHAP. III. 
Account of the Progress and Accomplishment 
of the Independence of St. Domingo. 


AT the commencement of these changes in the government of the mother 
country, and consequently of others in that of the colonies, the governor of 
French St. Domingo was M. Duchilleau,’®* a man of no moderate powers, 


78 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


but who, from conciliating the temper of the new council of France, was 
continued in his office. It soon however became, in power or consequence, 
but nugatory; for, upon the first meeting of the assemblies before described, 
his proclamations were disregarded, and his government insulted, if not de- 
spised. 

The States-General, at which two deputies appeared from each of the prov- 
inces, declared themselves the National Assembly in May, 1789, and on the 
20th of August they made their Declaration of Rights? Between these two 
periods, the public mind had been heated against the white colonists by such 
a variety of means, as to threaten their total annihilation. 

The publication of the Declaration of Rights did not tend to remedy this un- 
favorable impression of the people against one of their own communities; for 
the article that, “All men are born, and continue, free and equal as to their 
rights,” implied an entire subversion of their establishments, and created 
a complete ferment among the whole of the French proprietors. They con- 
ceived, and the French government appear afterwards to have done the same, 
that the effect of this declaration was to rouse the negroes to an assertion of 
those rights it was supposed to give them. Apprehensive of disorders aris- 
ing in the colony, the governor soon received orders from his new constitu- 
ents, the National Assembly”! to call together the inhabitants for the pur- 
pose of interior regulation. The measure had been anticipated by the ready 
disposition of the self-constituted legislators, and a provincial assembly for 
the northern district had already met at Cape Francois; an example which 
was soon followed by the western and southern provinces, the former of 
which met at Port-au-Prince, and the latter at Aux Cayes. For more immedi- 
ate communication between the people, and to accommodate every descrip- 
tion, parochial committees were also established. These committees were of 
the disposition which might be expected, and, by dividing among themselves 
upon every occasion, they served only to inform the negroes of their frivolity, 
and to excite them to take advantage of their want of unanimity and power; 
and the principal determination in their proceedings was that, of the neces- 
sity of a full and speedy colonial representation. The order of the king, how- 
ever, which was received in January 1790, tended to supersede their delib- 
erations, by convoking a general Colonial Assembly, which was appointed to 
meet in the central town of Leogane. The mode which it directed of electing 
the members did not satisfy the provincial assemblies, and they substituted a 
plan of their own, changing the town of Leogane to that of St. Marc, and fix- 
ing on the 25th of March, and afterwards on the 16th of April, for the time of 
meeting. 

The mulattoes, not willing to be left behind in exertion, when they per- 
ceived the opposition of the whites to every movement of the government, 


CHAPTERIII 79 


determined to proceed a step still further, and accordingly arming them- 
selves, they proceeded to claim by force the benefit of equal privileges with 
the whites. Their combination was premature, and they were soon overpow- 
ered. Different parties were secured at Jacmel and Artibonite, to whom, on 
their submission, notwithstanding the exasperation of the whites in general 
against them, an unconditional pardon was given”? In the division of parties, 
too, inconsistent as it may appear, some of the whites, among whom were 
included persons of high respectability, adopted the cause of the people of 
colour, and even seconded their inclination to revolt. Among these, an old 
magistrate named Ferrand de Beaudierre,’”* was the first to become con- 
spicuous, for the purpose of removing the disgrace which had attached to 
him in consequence of having offered marriage to a woman of colour. He 
drew up a memorial in their behalf, which had not time to be presented to 
the parochial committee, before he was seized by an enraged mob, and put 
to death. The deputy procureur-general, M. Dubois,’ also, whose duty de- 
manded a different course, became so infatuated, as to declaim against the 
slavery of the negroes in their presence; but he enjoyed a milder fate; he was 
only arrested by the people, and dismissed from the colony by the governor, 
who soon after followed. 

Such was the confused state of the colony, and every one seemed to be so 
bent upon harassing the metropolitan government, that it was, with great 
reason, apprehended in France, that the island was about to declare itself in- 
dependent, or to submit to some foreign power. The alarm became general 
throughout those places which had any concern with St. Domingo, and the 
National Assembly on being earnestly implored to consider of the best means 
of saving so valuable a dependency resolved, after a serious discussion of the 
subject, “That it was not the intention of the Assembly to interfere with the 
interior government of the colonies, or to subject them to laws incompatible 
with their local establishments; they therefore authorized the inhabitants of 
each colony to signify their own plan of legislation and commercial arrange- 
ment, preserving only a conformity with the principles of the mother coun- 
try, and a regard for the reciprocal interests of both!” It superadded, that 
no innovation was intended in any system of commerce in which the colonies 
were already concerned. It will easily be conceived that this conciliating reso- 
lution, so necessary, as regarded the discontented white colonists, would be 
very differently received by the people of colour. It excited among them a 
general clamour, which extended to every part where their cause (diffused 
by the means used on those occasions) was known, or even heard of. 

The period having arrived to which the General Assembly of St. Domingo 
had been prorogued, it met to the number of two hundred and thirteen mem- 
bers, at the town of St. Marc. These consisted of two representatives from 


80 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


each parish, twenty-four from the city of Cape François, sixteen from that 
of Port-au-Prince, and eight from Aux Cayes. The provincial assemblies con- 
tinued in their self-appointments notwithstanding, and even formed com- 
mittees, to act in the intervals of meeting. The new assembly commenced its 
functions by reviewing the objects of abuse in the old colonial government, 
and in proposing means for their remedy, of which the political incapacities 
of the mulattoes, and a revisal of the slave laws, bore a promising part. They 
put the mulattoes, in point of military duty, on the same footing with the 
whites, restricting the king’s officers commanding in the towns, from those 
oppressive acts towards them which they had sometimes experienced; they 
examined into those abuses in the courts of judicature which claimed im- 
mediate redress; and set about preparing a new colonial constitution. 

To extend the divisions, which were increasing, rather than otherwise, 
among the proprietors and their representatives, the new governor-general'”® 
was a man privately devoted to the old system, who immediately combined 
those who had any interest in the ancient despotism, to oppose the colonial 
revolution, which would be likely to deprive them of their corrupt sources 
of profit. As these included all the officers under the fiscal administration, 
tax-gatherers, appendages to the courts of civil and criminal jurisdiction, and 
most of those who held military commissions under the king’s authority, they 
formed a power, by no means contemptible, and possessed an advantage in 
being all sincere in their attachment to one cause, while a diversity of opin- 
ions swayed the newly established party. To this association was added one, 
(from many of whom their country has since suffered much,) who, with con- 
siderable talents, and an enterprising genius, was bent upon counter-projects 
against every act of the General Assembly; this was the Colonel and Cheva- 


lier Mauduit,!”” 


who commanded, and was beloved by the regiment of Port- 
au-Prince. He had returned from France, by way of Italy, and had last parted 
with the Count D’Artois,1”® to whose fortunes he was much devoted. Thus, 
impressed with more than common warmth in the cause, in which he now 
took such an active part, he did not fail to strike a blow to the interests of the 
colony; by insinuating himself between the Assembly and those in whose 
favor they were exerting themselves, he divided them against each other, and 
to this effort Peynier, who was weak and uninformed, resigned all his power, 
or influence, into his hands. 

As if to meet the insidious policy of Mauduit, the divisions of the new legis- 
lative bodies burst into open convulsion, by the conduct of the provincial 
assembly of the north, who endeavoured to the utmost of their power, to 
counteract the provisions of the General Assembly. 

The decree which was the result of its deliberations being May completed, 
the plan for a new constitution was published; which, as if every thing was to 


CHAPTER III 81 


coincide with the untoward disposition of affairs, was so framed as to please 
scarce any party, and formed the ostensible motive for the commencement 
of hostilities in the party of M. Peynier. The principal articles of this consti- 
tution (of which there were ten,) consisted in 

I. Vesting in the “General Assembly of the French part of St. Domingo,” the 
entire management of the internal concerns of the colony. 

II. Preventing any act of the legislative body relative to the internal con- 
cerns of the colony, from becoming a law, until definitively sanctioned by the 
Representatives of the People, and confirmed by the king. 

III. IV. and V. Enabling the Assembly to enact provisional laws for their own 
government. Nevertheless, to keep as a separate question the execution of 
those laws; and in case of the governor-general (to whom such decrees shall 
be notified for the purpose of being enforced) sending any observations on 
them to the Assembly, causing them to be entered on the Journals, ordering 
a consequent revision, and ultimately deciding on its confirmation, or rejec- 
tion, by a majority of two thirds. 

VI. Establishing a communication on all common, and commercial con- 
cerns, with the National Assembly, without which, nor until they are con- 
firmed by the Colonial Assembly, its decrees shall not be valid. 

VII. Allowing the importation of necessary articles upon pressing occa- 
sions, under the cognizance of the governor-general. 

VIII. Submitting every provisional act of the Assembly to be transmitted for 
the royal sanction, and suspended upon its refusal. 

IX. Creating a new General Assembly biennially. 

X. Communicating to the king, the National Assembly, the Colonial Gover- 
nor, and the different districts and parishes, the present decree.’ 

To repeat that much difference of opinion existed with respect to this de- 
cree, is what was to be expected from every circumstance; and the power 
retained by the Assembly, was evidently beyond what had ever been contem- 
plated in the colonies. The leading opinions were, however, (among those 
the most capable of judging,) that it was intended to declare the island an 
independent state, or, that it was already sold by a party to the English. That 
both these reports were not entirely without foundation, subsequent events 
will appear to have proved, for it is confessed by M. de Charmilly, one of the 
members of this very assembly, that the former proposition “was a subject of 
consideration among a few of the inhabitants, the opulence and prosperity of 
the colony having dazzled some sanguine characters,” and, it was not three 


* : : 242 : : 2 : : > : 
“Je conviens qu’il a été question d'indépendance parmi un petit nombre d’habitans, 
mais la richesse de la colonie, sa prospérité, avaient trompé quelques caractères ardens, 
&c.” — Lettre, p. 52. 


82 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


years after, before that gentleman induced the British government to accept 
the submission of a part of the proprietors of the island.'8° 

The inhabitants of the Cape, and of some of the western parishes, did not 
wait for these confirmations of their opinions; for, immediately on the pub- 
lication of the new plan of government, they renounced all obedience to the 
Assembly, and presented a memorial to the governor, requesting its dissolu- 
tion. This step could not but be agreeable to Peynier, if it was not the effect 
of the exertions of his party; and, another circumstance which happened, 
gave him the opportunity he evidently desired, of coming to an open rupture. 
In consequence of an espousal of the conduct of the governor and his party 
by M. Galisonierre,'** the commander of a ship of the line, called the Leop- 
ard, then in the harbour of Port-au-Prince, the crew thought proper to with- 
draw their obedience from him, and to oblige him to quit the ship; they then 
gave the command to the first lieutenant, and declared themselves waiting 
the orders of the General Assembly. The Assembly, by no means disinclined 
to such an offer, transmitted them in return a vote of thanks, and directed 
them, in the name of the law and the king, to detain the ship in the road, 
there to wait till further orders. To retain this acquisition, they permitted 
some of their partizans to take possession of the powder magazine at Leo- 
gane. It has been disputed whether the crew of M. Galisonierre’s ship had 
been corrupted by the party supporting the Assembly, or actuated by the 
caprice which so often influences seamen; but as it appears that their future 
movements were without the knowledge of the Assembly, it is reasonable to 
believe, that neither the one nor the other was the cause, but that they acted 
entirely by themselves, among whom might be probably some characters of 
more importance, than is conceived by those who view them merely in their 
ordinary employment. 

Such are the fortuitous incidents which lead to events that decide the fate 
of countries. 

M. Peynier now conceived himself provided with the means of criminat- 
ing the party, whose power so much curtailed his own. He immediately pro- 
claimed the dissolution of the Assembly, charging it with projects of indepen- 
dency, and with having traitorously possessed itself of one of the king’s ships 
by corrupting the crew; pronouncing the whole, with their adherents, traitors 
to the colony, the French nation, and the king; he declared his intention of 
bringing them to condign punishment, and to commence hostile operations 
against them. He had no sooner threatened, than he attempted to put his 
menaces into execution. He prepared for the restoration of the ancient sys- 
tem, and he even applied to the neighbouring island of Cuba for the aid of 
foreign troops; and he commissioned Mauduit to arrest the committee of the 
western provincial Assembly, who had become obnoxious to him from their 


CHAPTER III 83 


inclination to the measures of his opponents, at their midnight meeting in 
Port-au-Prince. Mauduit, however, found them protected by four hundred of 
the national guards, (formerly the colonial militia,) and having himself but 
one hundred men, he was compelled, after a short skirmish, to retire, with- 
out effecting any thing more than the seizure of the national colours, which 
he must have obtained by some undue means, and bore off in triumph. 

The General Assembly in return summoned the people from every part 
of the colony, to arm for the protection of their representatives, and the 
summons seemed to be generally obeyed with alacrity. The western and the 
southern provinces were unqualified in their approbation, and immediately 
dispatched a force of two thousand men on their way to Port-au-Prince. The 
Provincial Assembly of the north, however, joined the party of the governor, 
and detached a part of the regular troops in that quarter, with a body of two 
hundred mulattoes. Thus the flames of civil war were immediately about to 
be lighted, and a dreadful conflict was expected on every side, when a cir- 
cumstance occurred which for the present prevented it, and gave a more 
favourable turn to the public affairs than that which they had hitherto taken. 

The crew of the Leopard having determined upon returning to France, they 
brought the ship into the entrance of St. Marc’s bay, to apprize the Assem- 
bly of her departure, and to wait under sail for their dispatches to the king 
and the National Assembly. The General Assembly was reduced by this time, 
in consequence of sickness and secession, to less than one hundred mem- 
bers, and was diminishing every day: they had found themselves at first not 
sufficiently competent to the art of legislation, and their task was becoming 
every day more arduous. The majority of them were fathers of families; and 
could not but perceive that a storm was gathering, in which some, if not all 
of them, might be involved. Whatever was the motive, or whether or not it 
had a portion of the eccentricity which has been ascribed to it, eighty-five 
members of the General Assembly came to the immediate, and unexpected 
resolution, of availing themselves of this opportunity to proceed to Europe, 
for the purpose of deriving assistance in their future conduct, and justifying 
themselves as to what had already passed, preventing the effusion of human 
blood. They took their departure, therefore, on board the Leopard, and such 
was the good fortune which attended this step in the outset, that it excited 
for them, for the first time, a very general admiration; crowds followed them 
to the shore with tears and blessings, and prayers were every where preferred 
for the success which their forbearance was considered to deserve. The arma- 
ments were mutually suspended. The heads of the government party viewed 
the circumstance with mixed emotions of surprize and terror, and M. Peynier 
tremblingly resumed his seat. 

Thus, it were to be hoped that peace would have continued during the 


84 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


passage of the members to France, and until the result of their journey were 
known; particularly as the remaining part were occupied in arrangements, 
and in prepossessing the French government against the General Assembly 
on their arrival; but, no sooner was one cause of commotion removed, than 
another supplied its place, of a more hostile complexion, and with less occa- 
sion—the rebellion of James Ogé,'#? a mulatto; whose mother had a coffee- 
plantation about thirty miles from Cape François. During his residence at 
Paris, for the purpose of education, he had imbibed, in addition to the natu- 
ral feelings of his class, all the prejudices entertained at this period against 
the white planters in the mother country. Having become connected with the 
society of Amis des Noirs, and inflated with an idea of his own capacity, he 
was easily persuaded by Robespierre, and other violent members, to attach 
himself to a conspiracy, supposed to be already ripe in St. Domingo, and re- 
quiring only the talents of an active leader to produce the effects desired, in 
behalf of the people of colour. Armed indirectly by their means, and charged 
with all the inveteracy of the party, Ogé arrived in St. Domingo about two 
months after the Assembly had left it, and immediately prepared to assume 
an imaginary command, for which he had no foundation. He found means to 
convey a quantity of arms and ammunition to a place called Grande Riviére, 
about fifteen miles from the Cape, where his brother had been prepared to 
receive it, and, having collected about two hundred followers, exerted him- 
self every where in spreading disaffection; he wrote imperiously to M. Pey- 
nier, stating the inattention which had been paid to the execution of the Code 
Noir,” demanding its enforcement, and also an extension of the privileges 
enjoyed by the whites to all persons without distinction. He took upon him- 
self the character of Protector of the Mulattoes, and declared his intention, 
if necessary, of arming in their behalf. He established his camp where he had 
deposited his stores, and appointed his two brothers, and another mulatto, 
of a ferocious character, named Mark Chavane %4 his lieutenants. These men 
commenced their unruly operations by the murder of two white men, whom 
they met accidentally, and by punishing with extreme cruelty those of their 
own complexion not disposed to revolt; one who excused himself on account 
of a wife and six children, they murdered, with the whole of his family. For- 
tunately their reign was not long, for a body of regular troops, and the Cape 
militia, were dispatched to invest their camp, when, with a weak resistance, 
they were totally routed; many were killed, sixty were taken prisoners, and 
the chiefs escaped into the Spanish part of the island. 

This rebellion, though so easily crushed, excited a considerable animosity 


The laws for the protection of the Blacks, instituted by Louis XIV. 


CHAPTER III 85 


against the people of colour, who, in their turn, as if fearing a retaliation of 
cruelty, took to arms, and formed camps in different parts of the island, each 
of them of much greater importance than that of Ogé. The white inhabi- 
tants collected themselves in force to oppose them. But Colonel Mauduit, 
(by means not publicly communicated,) in a conference, had, singly and un- 
attended, with the mulatto leaders, at their chief camp at Verettes, induced 
them to an immediate dispersion. Various doubts existed as to the nature of 
the means, which were supposed not to be highly honourable to M. Mauduit: 
certain it is, however, the mulattoes were not perfectly satisfied; for their 
leader at Aux Cayes, Rigaud, declared that “it was a transient and deceitful 
calm, and, that no peace would be permanent until one class of people had 
exterminated the other." 

The insurrection of the mulattoes was no sooner suppressed a second time, 
than a fresh object of disturbance arose, more fatal than either, and least ex- 
pected. This was the arrival of a decree of the National Assembly, censuring, 
with great asperity, the conduct of the General Assembly of St. Domingo, 
charging it with disaffection to France, and insubordination; annulling all its 
acts, incapacitating its members from ever serving again; approving the con- 
duct of the governor’s party, particularly the Northern Provincial Assembly 
and Colonel Mauduit; directing a new Colonial Assembly to be formed on 
the principle of the decree of March 8, and the instructions of March 28, and 
ordering under arrest, during its pleasure, the members who had quitted the 
island, and who were still at Paris. It also recommended an additional force, 
both naval and military, to be sent to the colony for the better support of the 
authority of the government.’*° 

On the arrival of the eighty-five members of the Colonial Assembly at Brest 
(on the 13th of September), they had been received with the utmost respect 
and attention by all ranks of people; and the most liberal provision made for 
them in every way; but, such had been the activity of M. Peynier, that depu- 
ties had arrived before them from the provincial assembly of the north, who, 
with their agents, had so prejudiced the mind of M. Barnave,'*’ the minister 
for this department, that they met at Paris with indignities of every kind; 
were dismissed from the bar of the National Assembly with contempt, and 
refused even permission to confront their enemies as they requested. On the 
16th of October the report of the committee for the colonies on the subject 
was presented by M. Barnave, their president, and the members placed under 
arrest. 

A very general manifestation of surprize and indignation took place on 


*Edwards’s St. Domingo, p. 46. 


86 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the arrival of this decree, and a very different sentiment pervaded the public 
mind from that intended to be produced by the National Assembly; in every 
particular Mauduit and his regiment became objects of the warmest resent- 
ment. Many of the parishes would send no other deputies to form the new 
Colonial Assembly, because they considered those in France as their legal 
representatives, the annulling of whose decrees, they attributed to the revival 
of the ancient system of despotism. 

Whether it was from intimidation at these succeeding disorders, or from 
the wish of the National Assembly, does not appear; M. Peynier, however, to 
the great satisfaction of the majority of the planters, at this time resigned his 
office to the gentleman next in command, General Blanchelande,"® a field- 
officer in the French service, who entered upon the government with pecu- 
liar vigour. 

The first exercise of his power, and one rather unexpected, was to demand 
of the Spaniards the fugitives from the rebellion of Ogé, who were accord- 
ingly delivered up, and placed in the jail of Cape François, till a commission 
should be issued to bring them to trial. It was soon commenced, but lasted 
for a considerable time, during which they were strictly examined, and, of 
course, condemned. 

Ogé and his lieutenant, Chavane, were sentenced to be broken alive upon 
the wheel, and left to perish. His followers, including one of his brothers 
(the other not being found), to the number of twenty, were condemned to be 
hanged. Ogé was not a man calculated for a leader of rebellion. His mother 
having been enabled to support him in France as a gentleman, he had cher- 
ished a delicacy of sentiment very incompatible with the ferocity of revolt; 
but it would appear also that he wanted personal courage, and that fidelity 
to his colleagues which alone inspires respect in his circumstances. When 
he heard the judgment of the court, he wept bitterly, and implored mercy in 
the most abject manner; proposing to purchase life by exposing the secrets 
of numerous conspiracies, which he described as impending over the colony: 
he, however, extended it only by a reprieve for twenty-four hours, just time 
enough to make a brief deposition of facts of the highest importance, if they 
had been immediately attended to; and was then hurried to execution with 
a celerity rather barbarous, and an impolicy which afterwards met with its 
consequences. Chavane preserved the appearance of courage to the last, and 
resigned himself to his fate without a groan. 

The persons before whom the deposition of Ogé was taken, (Ruotte and 
Vertierres,'*° members of the Northern Provincial Assembly,) had been ap- 
pointed to examine the revolters; and were devotees to the ancient system; 
from what motive, perhaps, may be seen afterwards, whether by the desire of 


CHAPTER III 87 


the principal officer in the colonial administration, or of the Northern Pro- 
vincial Assembly, is not minutely ascertained; but these men suppressed en- 
tirely the information communicated by Ogé, and reported that he had said 
nothing of importance, burying his secret, if he had any, with himself. That 
this was not the case will appear hereafter. 

The decisive spirit of the new governor did not prevent the people from 
viewing the detention of their representatives in France with a general dis- 
satisfaction, and those to whom they attributed the original cause of it, with 
additional dislike. Mauduit continued to be the object of their censure in a 
particular degree; they avowedly disapproved of that conduct at St. Marc’s, 
which the National Assembly had made a subject of particular approbation; 
one act of which they availed themselves with reason; this was, taking from a 
detachment of the national guards, as before-mentioned, their colours, which 
had never been returned. This deprivation the whole of the national guards 
regarded as an insult to their body, which they would have immediately re- 
venged, but that the veteran regiment of Port-au-Prince was remarkable for 
its superior discipline, and attachment to the commanding officer, whose 
bounty was always open to them. They had long given him a particular token 
of their regard, in supplanting the national cockade,'*° by a white feather, 
the avowed insigne of royalty. The regiment therefore, as well as its colonel, 
became obnoxious to the whole of the army, who were attached to the new 
constitution. At this time, a reinforcement of troops from France, compris- 
ing two battalions of the regiments of Artois and Normandy, arrived in the 
frigates Le Fougueux and Le Borée, who, having communicated in some way 
with the crew of the Leopard (the vessel which carried the Colonial Assem- 
bly to France), no sooner landed at Port-au-Prince, than they discovered the 
same animosity against the regiment of Mauduit, as was manifested by the 
national guards. They treated them as traitors, which, no doubt, the pecu- 
liarity of the white feather confirmed, and refused all kind of intercourse with 
them. The conduct of the national guards had hitherto passed unheeded, 
but when two other regiments, and those arrived from the mother-country, 
became leagued against them, it occasioned a visible effect upon the minds 
of the officers and the men. They began to view each other with distrust, 
and to consider the regard which they had hitherto born to their idolized 
commander, as almost criminal. A sullen discontent appeared on every face, 
and their actions, amongst which was a contemptuous dismissal of the white 
feather, augured no good intentions towards him who, but a few weeks be- 
fore, might have led them over the world. Mauduit was not insensible of the 
change, or of the probability of danger; and he prepared for some arrange- 
ment to induce a return of the good opinion of his troops; before he made the 


88 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


experiment, however, he bravely insisted on the governor removing himself 
and his family to Cape François, that he might not have a chance of sharing 
in his own ruin if it was unavoidable, to which M. Blanchelande (rather piti- 
fully) consented. 

Colonel Mauduit prepared, as the first effort of conciliation, for a resti- 
tution of the colours to the national guards, the unfortunate cause of the 
alienation of his own troops; and proposed, if they would support him, to 
carry them with his own hands, at their head to the church, in which they 
should be deposited. He harangued his grenadiers to that purpose, and they 
promised to support him with their lives. On the succeeding day he put his 
proposed plan in execution, before the whole community of Port-au-Prince. 
A considerable murmur took place, but means were taken by the citizens 
(among whom it is said were some he had most injured) to prevent any acci- 
dent.“ He had replaced the colours, and was turning, no doubt, to meet the 
gratulations of his troops, which had so often cheered him, when one of them 
commanded him aloud, to ask pardon of the national guards, on his knees! He 
started with indignation at the proposition, and intending to offer them his 
life, rather than his honour, exposed to them his naked bosom. In an instant, 
an hundred bayonets seemed to vie with each other which should wound the 
deepest, and he fell, gored all over; while scarce an arm of the number he 
had so often made happy, was raised to save him, or a voice among those so 
often exerted in his praise, to bid his spirit rest.t The spectators, however un- 
friendly they might have been to the deceased, were petrified with astonish- 
ment and disgust. Not contented with the extinction of life, this unmanly and 
treacherous number, whose conduct is, it is hoped, unparalleled, not content 
with destroying his house, and every thing belonging to him, gratified them- 
selves with mutilating the dead body of their once-loved commander; and, 
by a thousand diabolical contrivances, rendering disgusting in death a form 
which, through life, had been always beloved and honoured, and sometimes 
respected and admired. This wretched regiment met the proper fate of all 
such dastardly perpetrators. They were despised even by the soldiery whom 
they meant to oblige, compelled to lay down their arms, and sent prisoners to 
France, where, in some shape or other, punishment failed not to await them. 


“The exertions on this occasion of the brave Beausobre were too striking to be passed 
in silence. He had been struck with a shot, when protecting the Colonial Committee, in 
the affair for which Mauduit was now attempting an extenuation; yet, with a generosity 
not often equalled, he was among the foremost to step forward on the present occasion, 
and was wounded by a sabre in defending the life of Mauduit. 

tTwo officers named Galefeau and Germain, to their honour, did not desert their 
colonel till the last moment, but their exertions were of no avail; and the indignation of 
the soldiers being at its height, there was no time for preparation. 


CHAPTER III 89 


During these dreadful transactions, as if eager to provide fresh fuel to light 
up in this unhappy island, the society of Amis des Noirs continued to devise 
new projects that thoroughly effected that purpose. There was great reason 
to suppose, at this time, that the general body of mulattoes were not averse 
to conciliation, while there was as much cause to desire it on the part of the 
whites. The president of the colonial committee in France, (M. Barnave,) had 
also, after the most strenuous opposition to the planters, avowed his convic- 
tion, that all interference of the mother-country with their internal regula- 
tions should cease. But the principal members of this society, among whom 
were Grégoire, La Fayette, and Brissot,'°' determined otherwise, and the 
foundation of their plan was in making the National Assembly the medium, 
in obedience to the chapter of instructions for its proceedings, which had 
followed the decree of March 8. These instructions, which consisted of eigh- 
teen articles, directed “that every person of the age of twenty-five and up- 
wards, possessing property, or, having resided two years in the colony, and 
paid taxes, should be enabled to vote in the formation of the Colonial Assem- 
bly.” +°? This direction, repugnant to the very decree it was to accompany, was 
asserted by those who procured it, to regard only the privilege of voting in 
the Parochial Assemblies; as under the old government it was known that 
they were constituted solely of white persons, the mulattoes had expressed 
no inclination to intrude themselves. To induce them to do so, they were ap- 
prised that not being excepted, they were virtually included, and after much 
entreaty, were persuaded to send deputies to France, to procure an expla- 
nation from the National Assembly. This was the chief point required, for it 
produced a public debate on the subject, in which was also introduced the 
claim of the mulattoes to all the privileges of whites. The fascinating elo- 
quence of the Abbé Grégoire was exerted on the subject with its usual vigour, 
and, to give additional aid, the death of Ogé became known at the same time, 
which afforded a popular subject for the theatres. Every mode was exerted to 
render the proprietors of the colonies detestable; and with such success, that 
they could not, at length, appear in public with safety. “Perish the colonies,” 
exclaimed Robespierre, “rather than sacrifice our principles!” °?— Grégoire, 
Condorcet,” La Fayette, and Brissot, names which often excited admiration, 
all joined in the cry. The National Assembly forgetting, at once, its former 
acts, and the principles it had acknowledged, decreed to the people of colour 
“an equal right with the white proprietors, in the choice of representatives 
and to seats in the colonial government” The colonial committee at Paris, 
which had formerly opposed the General Assembly, immediately declared 
itself useless; and the deputies of the colonies declined further attendance. 
These decisive steps had no other effect, however, than that of hastening the 
departure of three commissioners, (who had been appointed some time 


90 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


previous) to St. Domingo, for the better regulation of its affairs. The pro- 
ceedings of the colonial officers in the mother-country, afforded but a faint 
presentiment of those which took place in St. Domingo on the arrival of the 
first information of this last decree in that island. There then existed a variety 
of opposite opinions, and parties inveterate against each other, but it im- 
mediately consolidated them all. They heard it with doubt, which was soon 
succeeded by the frenzy of despair. All the divisions of party united them- 
selves against the mother-country; every violence was projected and com- 
menced; the preparations making for the federation of the 14th of July were 
suspended; they determined to reject the civic oath; an embargo was laid on 
all vessels in the harbour; and even a motion was made in the Northern Pro- 
vincial Assembly, to erect the British standard in the place of the national 
colours; all subordination was done away, and it is said, “the people of colour 
being threatened to be fired upon in the streets, fled from the city, retiring to 
the woods and other retreats for safety.’* At length it was determined to elect 
a new general Colonial Assembly, which had its first meeting, to the number 
of one hundred and seventy-six members, at Leogane, from whence they ad- 
journed to Cape François, proposing to open their session at the expiration 
of a fortnight. 

During the whole of these transactions the governor-general, M. Blanche- 
lande, remained a political cypher, without any other power, than to give a 
formal assent to proceedings which he could neither impede nor amend. He 
wrote to the king’s ministers an account of the disturbances, and expressed 
his fears that the decree would prove “the death-warrant of many thousands 
of the inhabitants;” "7 he sent a copy of his letter to the Provincial Assembly, 
with a solemn assurance, that he would suspend the execution of the decree 
whenever it should come to him. 

Alarmed at the various symptoms of hostility manifested towards them, the 
mulattoes collected in armed bodies in different places, and fears were enter- 
tained of fresh conflicts between them and the whites; but the latter were too 
much occupied in the hopes entertained from the meeting of the Colonial 
Assembly to notice them, and, in fact, a complete removal of grievances was 
fully expected. 

As little cessation had been experienced, from the occurrence of one dis- 
aster to another, on the expectation of pacific measures (from the auspicious 
sentiments of the new assembly,) another misfortune arose, which, however 
it might have been long expected, was still more unlooked-for than any other. 
Witnesses of the general commotion of the colony, and perceiving that, not- 


“Inquiry into the Causes of the Insurrection in St. Domingo,” &c. 1792. 


CHAPTER III 91 


withstanding the attention which had been paid by the mother-country to 
the people of colour, (except interweaving their sufferings with the subject, 
for the purposes of oratory,) nothing was proposed with regard to them; the 
negroes began to consider of some melioration for themselves among the 
new arrangements then taking place. As they had unfortunately perceived 
that the first step in all the disputes of their masters had consisted of outrage, 
so they determined to follow those means which promised such certain suc- 
cess, and at the same time, afforded objects the most grateful to people in a 
state of slavery. It cannot be denied, that they may have felt no great plea- 
sure in contemplating an acquisition of power by the mulattoes, who, from 
being, according to their own account, more conversant with their habits, 
and better acquainted with their dispositions, had always been considered by 
the negroes as their severest masters; it is very probable, that they exercised 
the same, or greater rigor, over the negroes, than they received themselves 
from the whites. Be this as it may, while a perfect calm seemed to pervade 
every contending interest, one morning before day-break a sudden and con- 
fused alarm spread throughout the town of the Cape, that the negro slaves 
in the neighbouring parishes had revolted, were murdering the whites, and 
setting fire to the plantations. The governor immediately assembled all the 
military officers, but nothing certain could be collected till dawn, when the 
reports were too sadly confirmed by the arrival of numbers, just escaped with 
life, who, begging for protection in the town, communicated the particulars. 

From them they found, that the negroes in a plantation called Noé, in the 
parish of Acul, were the ringleaders, fourteen of whom, after having mur- 
dered the principal managers of the plantation, followed by the remainder, 
hastened to the adjoining one, and repeated the same enormities. The slaves 
of this estate immediately joined them. Their determination seemed, that it 
was necessary none should escape, for they shewed not the same discrimi- 
nation they afterwards used. M. Clements, the owner of the latter plantation 
received his death from one he had regarded with much tenderness, and 
promoted (for so it was considered) to be his postilion. The same occurred 
at the largest plantation on the plain of the Cape, that of M. Galifet, whose 
negroes, the whole of whom joined the insurrection, were proverbial for re- 
ceiving good treatment."® Similar circumstances took place at the very time, 
on the estate of M. Flaville, a few miles distant, from whence they carried off 
the wife, and three daughters, of the Procureur, after murdering him before 
their faces. Day-light convinced the astonished inhabitants that the revolt 
was concerted, for some parties of observation sent from the town, soon per- 
ceived that the rising was general throughout the province, and the flames 
quickly burst from all quarters. The terror of the whole community now be- 


92 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


came excessive, and the shrieks of women and children as the appearances 
of horror spread, wildly running from door to door, inquiring their fate of 
each other, produced a most distressing effect. The men armed themselves, 
and the General Assembly invested the governor with the command of the 
National Guards. As soon as any plan could be matured, it was determined, 
to send the white women and children on board the ships in the harbour; and 
the ablest of the domestic negroes in the town were also sent, under a guard, 
lest they should be concerned in any treacherous connection. 

The next transaction which took place was relative to a considerable body 
of mulattoes in the town, who, although they had not joined the previous dis- 
putes, were immediately marked as objects of vengeance by the lower classes 
of white people, and it became necessary for the Assembly to afford them 
protection. This circumstance became the medium of an agreeable concilia- 
tion; for, in return, all the able men among them, proposed themselves to 
march against the rebels, leaving their wives and children as hostages for 
their fidelity. They were, therefore, enrolled in the militia, and a mutual con- 
fidence, to a certain degree, established itself between them. 

As many seamen as could be spared from the ships were joined to the in- 
habitants, and the whole formed into a military order, when M. de Touzard,'*? 
an officer who had distinguished himself in North America, took the com- 
mand ofa detachment of militia and troops of the line, and marched to attack 
the most powerful body of the revolters in the neighbourhood. They were 
posted at the plantation of M. Latour, to the number of 4,000 negroes, a large 
portion of whom were destroyed, but their places were supplied by such in- 
creased numbers, that M. de Touzard was compelled to retreat. The weakness 
of the town obliged the governor to stand on the defensive, till he could con- 
trive means to strengthen the only position he could command; if the negroes 
had proceeded to Cape Francois at that time, they might have easily taken the 
town, and effected every enormity they chose. 

On the river which intersected the main road from the plain at the east end 
of the town, over which there was a ferry, a battery of cannon was raised on 
boats, protected by two small camps at a short distance; at the other principal 
road lying over the Haut du Cap, a considerable body of troops, with artillery, 
was stationed, while a strong palisade and chevaux-de-frize,*” surrounded 
the town on the land side; an embargo was laid on the shipping, for the pur- 
pose of retreat, and retaining the assistance of the sailors. The whole of the 
inhabitants, without distinction, laboured at the fortifications. 

Every method was used to communicate the information of the insurrec- 
tion, when it could be conveyed with safety, and several camps were formed, 
which seemed to arrest the progress of the rebellion; nevertheless, those at 


CHAPTER III 93 


Grande Rivière and Dondon were attacked by the negroes, joined by mulat- 
toes, and after a sharp contest, forced with great slaughter. The surviving 
whites from Dondon took refuge in the Spanish territory. 

The whole of the plain, of the Cape, and the district of Grande Rivière, now 
in the possession of the insurgents, and abandoned to their ravages, as were 
the miserable inhabitants, to whom no assistance could be given, who, there- 
fore, suffered every injury, that bewildered licentiousness could devise, be- 
fore a death, in this instance merciful, but of more than common torments, 
closed for them the scene. 

It serves few of the purposes of history to describe the various modes of 
torture which occurred to the savage insurgents, or to relate accounts of the 
grossest violations of virgins and pregnant women, in the presence of their 
dying husbands, or parents; much it is to be regretted, that civilized states 
should ever find it necessary to render torture of any kind familiar to vul- 
gar minds, for they are exhibitions that live in the memory, and steel the 
heart against those affections which form the grandest boundary of our na- 
ture. There is reason to fear that the perpetrators of those horrid deeds, had 
been witnesses to the ridicule of misery in others who should have evinced 
themselves superior to such conduct, by the godlike attributes of mercy and 
benevolence; the licentiousness of their intercourse with the female slaves, 
could leave no impression to prevent a retaliation on the occasion, with ob- 
jects, too, of such superior attraction, alas! unhappily for themselves. 

It is pleasing, however, to alleviate these horrors by the recital of an in- 
stance of fidelity, and affectionate solicitude, in one of the revolted negroes, 
which has been already narrated, but which cannot be too much impressed 
upon the minds of the people in every relation of society. Mr. Edwards’s ac- 
count is here quoted as the most authentic, as I know of no more authentic 
source to which I can refer. 

“Monsieur and Madam Baillen, their daughter and son-in-law, and two 
white servants, residing on a mountain plantation about thirty miles from 
Cape François, were apprized of the revolt by one of their own slaves, who 
was himself in the conspiracy, but promised, if possible, to save the lives of 
his master and his family. Having no immediate means of providing for their 
escape, he conducted them into an adjacent wood; after which he went and 
joined the revolters. The following night he found an opportunity of bringing 
them provisions from the rebel camp. The second night he returned again 
with a further supply of provisions, but declared it would be out of his power 
to give them any further assistance. After this they saw nothing of the negro 
for three days; but at the end of that time he came again, and directed the 
family how to make their way to a river which led to Port Margot, assur- 


94 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


ing them they would find a canoe on a part of the river which he described. 
They followed his directions; found the canoe, and got safely into it, but were 
overset by the rapidity of the current, and after a narrow escape, thought it 
best to return to their retreat in the mountains. The negro, anxious for their 
safety, again found them out, and directed them to a broader part of the river, 
where he assured them he had provided a boat; but said it was the last effort 
he could make to save them. They went accordingly, but not finding the boat, 
gave themselves up for lost, when the faithful negro again appeared, like their 
guardian angel. He brought with him pigeons, poultry, and bread; and con- 
ducted the family, by slow marches in the night, along the banks of the river, 
until they were within sight of the wharf at Port Margot; when, telling them 
they were entirely out of danger, he took his leave for ever, and went to join 
the rebels. The family were in the woods nineteen nights.” 

The town of the Cape being somewhat strengthened, the governor, with the 
advice of the Colonial Assembly, came to the resolution of re-commencing 
offensive operations against the rebels; accordingly, a small force, under the 
command of M. Rouvray, encamped at a place called Roucooa, in the east- 
ern part of the plain. A division of the negroes at the same time took posses- 
sion of the principal buildings on the estate of the amiable M. Galifet, and 
mounted on the walls several pieces of heavy artillery, which they had pro- 
cured from the different harbours on the coast. In this intrenchment, they 
began to shew somewhat of regular manoeuvres; though they seldom stood 
more than a single volley in their skirmishes, yet they were repeated with 
alacrity, and with such success, that they harassed the whites by perpetual 
alarms, and desolated the country. After their first stock of ammunition was 
exhausted, it was discovered they had been supplied from the king’s arsenal, 
by some negroes in Cape Francois; in a short time the small American vessels 
opened a brisk trade with them in this article, for the sugar and rum of their 
masters. 

In two months of the rebellion, upwards of two thousand white persons 
had fallen, of all conditions and ages; it appeared, one thousand two hundred 
families were “reduced from opulence to such a state of misery, as to depend 
altogether for their clothing and sustenance on public and private charity;”72°2 
one hundred and eighty plantations of sugar, about nine hundred of coffee, 
cotton, and indigo, had been destroyed, and the buildings consumed by fire. 
On the side of the rebels it was computed, that upwards of ten thousand had 
perished in the different accidents attendant on their horrid warfare, besides 
several hundreds by the execution of the law. It is to be lamented, that a re- 


“Edwards's Hist. vi. p- 75- 


CHAPTER III 95 


taliation of cruelty took place upon all rebel prisoners who were taken, which 
could produce no advantage to those who had already suffered, and might 
cause additional miseries to the unfortunate objects who afterwards fell in 
the way of the enemy. One description of punishment at the Cape, has been 
often quoted from the gentleman who witnessed it. I cannot perfectly co- 
incide with him in the oblique censure conveyed against the unfortunate per- 
sons who expressed a degree of satisfaction at the death of their enemies, for 
it is a difficult sentiment to repress on such an occasion; nor, while I lament, 
can I deny the necessity of such executions, ON SUCH OCCASIONS; they are 
not intended as a feast for the philosopher, but they are a gratification to 
those whose services, whatever their feelings and their sentiments, demand 
and obtain from all enlightened politicians on all occasions respect. 

“Two of these unhappy men,” says Mr. Edwards, “suffered in this man- 
ner under the window of the author’s lodgings, and in his presence, at Cape 
François, on Thursday the 28th of September, 1791. They were broken on two 
pieces of timber placed crosswise. One of them expired on receiving the third 
stroke on his stomach, each of his legs and arms having been first broken in 
two places; the three first blows he bore without a groan. The other had a 
harder fate. When the executioner, after breaking his legs and arms, lifted up 
the instrument to give the finishing stroke upon the breast, and which, (by 
putting the criminal out of his pain,) is called le coup de grace, the mob, with 
the ferociousness of cannibals, called out arretez, (stop,) and compelled him 
to leave his work unfinished. In that condition, the miserable wretch, with 
his broken limbs doubled up, was put on a cart-wheel, which was placed 
horizontally, one end of the axle-tree being driven into the earth. He seemed 
perfectly sensible, but uttered not a groan. At the end of forty minutes, some 
English seamen, who were spectators of the tragedy, strangled him in mercy. 
As to all the French spectators, (many of them persons of fashion, who beheld 
the scene from the windows of their upper apartments, ) it grieves me to say, 
that they looked on with the most perfect composure and sang-froid. Some of 
the ladies, as I was told, even ridiculed, with a great deal of unseemly mirth, 
the sympathy manifested by the English* at the sufferings of the wretched 


LES 


criminals. 


*Will the present writer merit censure if he ventures to observe in this place, for the 
honor of a sex, of whom he feels a difficulty in recording a slander, that there was not, 
perhaps, one of these unhappy fair spectators who had not lost, through the means of the 
victims before them, a father, a mother, brother, or sister, or some of the tenderest connex- 
ions in human existence; and that despair, mingled with revenge, assumed the place of a 
sensibility too exquisite for their loss. This place need not be occupied with instances in 
the memory of every one, of the change effected in the best dispositions under such cir- 


96 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Having mentioned the residence of Mr. Edwards at the Cape, it may not 
be amiss to repeat in this place the account he gives of the appearance of the 
island, to a stranger, at that time. He had returned from Jamaica with the 
commissioners, who had been sent thither, and to the different neighbour- 
ing powers, to request the assistance of troops, arms, ammunition, and pro- 
visions; when Admiral Affleck?” ordered the Blonde and the Daphne frigates 
to repair to that place to overawe the insurgents. 

“We arrived,” says he, “in the harbour of Cape Frangois, in the evening of 
the 26th of September, and the first object which arrested our attention, as 
we approached, was a dreadful scene of devastation by fire. The noble plain 
adjoining the Cape was covered with ashes; and the surrounding hills, as far 
as the eye could reach, every where presented to us ruins still smoking, and 
houses and plantations at that moment in flames. It was a sight more terrible 
than the mind of any man, unaccustomed to such a scene, can easily con- 
ceive. —The inhabitants of the town, being assembled on the beach, directed 
all their attention towards us, and we landed amidst a crowd of spectators, 
who, with uplifted hands and streaming eyes, gave welcome to their deliver- 
ers, (for such they considered us, and acclamations of vivent les Anglois re- 
sounded from every quarter). 

“The governor of St. Domingo, at that time, was the unfortunate Blanche- 
lande, a marechal de camp in the French service, who has since perished on 
the scaffold. He did us the honor to receive us on the quay. A committee of 
the Colonial Assembly, accompanied by the governor’s only son, an amiable 
and accomplished youth, had before attended us on board the Blonde, and 
we were immediately conducted to the place of their meeting. The scene was 
striking and solemn. The hall was splendidly illuminated, and all the mem- 
bers appeared in mourning. Chairs were placed for us within the bar, and the 
governor having taken his seat on the right hand of the president, the latter 
addressed us in an elegant and affecting oration, of which the following is as 
literal a translation as the idiom of the two languages will admit: 

“We were not mistaken, Gentlemen, when we placed our confidence in 
your generosity; but we could hardly entertain a hope, that, besides send- 
ing us succours, you would come in person to give us consolation. You have 
quitted, without reluctance, the peaceful enjoyments of happiness at home, 


cumstances as these; and, while he eagerly joins his tribute of praise to the sympathy of his 

brave countrymen in this instance, he cannot forget that the inhabitants of St. Domingo, 

may not always have seen them in a light equally amiable; so that the contrast, added to 

the accompanying circumstances, may have excited a risibility, perhaps, convulsive. It is 

accessory to view all sides of a question which affects the character of a nation. 
“Edwards’s Hist. ch. vi. p- 78. 


CHAPTERIII 97 


to come and participate in the misfortunes of strangers, and blend your tears 
with ours. Scenes of misery (the contemplation of which, to those who are 
unaccustomed to misfortune, is commonly disgusting) have not suppressed 
your feelings. You have been willing to ascertain the full extent of our dis- 
tresses, and to pour into our wounds the salutary balm of your sensibility and 
compassion. 

“The picture which has been drawn of our calamities, you will find has 
fallen short of the reality. That verdure with which our fields were lately ar- 
rayed, is no longer visible; discoloured by the flames, and laid waste by the 
devastations of war, our coasts exhibit no prospect but that of desolation. The 
emblems which we wear on our persons, are the tokens of our grief for the 
loss of our brethren, who were surprized, and cruelly assassinated by the re- 
volters. 

“It is by the glare of the conflagrations that every way surround us, that 
we now deliberate; we are compelled to sit armed and watchful through the 
night, to keep the enemy from our sanctuary. For a long time past our bosoms 
have been depressed by sorrow; they experience this day, for the first time, 
the sweet emotions of pleasure, in beholding you amongst us. 

“Generous islanders! humanity has operated powerfully on your hearts; — 
you have yielded to the first emotion of your generosity, in the hopes of 
snatching us from death; for it is already too late to save us from misery. 
What a contrast between your conduct, and that of other nations! We will 
avail ourselves of your benevolence; but the days you preserve to us, will not 
be sufficient to manifest our gratitude; our children shall keep it in remem- 
brance. 

“Regenerated France, unapprized that such calamities might befall us, has 
taken no measures to protect us against their effects; with what admiration 
will she learn, that, without your assistance, we should no longer exist as a 
dependency to any nation. 

“The commissioners deputed by us to the island of Jamaica, have informed 
us of your exertions to serve us. — Receive the assurance of our attachment 
and sensibility. 

“The governor-general of this island, whose sentiments perfectly accord 
with our own, participates equally in the joy we receive at your presence, and 
in our gratitude for the assistance you have brought us. 

“At this juncture, the French colonists in St. Domingo, however they might 
have been divided in political sentiments on former occasions, seemed to be 
softened into perfect unanimity. All descriptions of persons joined in one 
general cry against the National Assembly, to whose proceedings were im- 
puted all their disasters. This opinion was indeed so widely disseminated, and 


98 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


so deeply rooted, as to create a very strong disposition, in all classes of the 
whites, to renounce their allegiance to the mother country. The black cock- 
ade was universally substituted in place of the tri-colored one, and very earn- 
est wishes were avowed in all companies, without scruple or restraint, that 
the British administration would send an armament to conquer the island, 
or rather to receive its voluntary surrender from the inhabitants. What they 
wished might happen, they persuaded themselves to believe was actually in 
contemplation. 

“The ravages of the rebellion during the time that I remained at Cape 
François, extended in all directions. The whole of the plain of the Cape, with 
the exception of one plantation which adjoined the town, was in ruins; as 
were likewise the parish of Limonade, and most of the settlements in the 
mountains adjacent. The parish of Limbé was every where on fire; and, be- 
fore my departure, the rebels had obtained possession of the bay and forts 
at L’Acul, as well as the districts of Fort Dauphin, Dondon, and La Grande 
Rivière. 

“Destruction every where marked their progress, and resistance seemed 
to be considered by the whites, not only as unavailing in the present con- 
juncture, but as hopeless in the future. To fill up the measure of their calami- 
ties, their Spanish neighbours in the same island, with a spirit of bigotry and 
hatred which is, I believe, without an example in the world, refused to lend 
any assistance towards suppressing a revolt, in the issue of which, common 
reason should have informed them, that their own preservation was impli- 
cated equally with that of the French. They were even accused, not only of 
supplying the rebels with arms and provisions, but also of delivering up to 
them to be murdered, many unhappy French planters who had fled for refuge 
to the Spanish territories, and receiving money from the rebels as the price 
of their blood. 

“The merchants and importers of European manufactures, apprehending 
every hour the destruction of the town, as much from incendiaries within, 
as from the rebels without, offered their goods, for ready money, at half the 
usual prices; and applications were made to Captain Affleck, by persons of all 
descriptions, for permission to embark in the Blonde for Jamaica. The inter- 
position of the Colonial Government obliged him to reject their solicitations; 
but means were contrived to send on board consignments of money to a great 
amount; and I know that other conveyances were found, by which effects to 
a considerable value were exported both to Jamaica, and the states of North 
America” 


*Edward’s St. Domingo, Preface, p. v. 


CHAPTERIII 99 


From the northern province the rebellion, rapidly spread to the west; in 
which quarter it assumed a new appearance; for the revolters being chiefly 
men of colour, to whom about six hundred negroes had attached themselves, 
it tended to confirm the opinion and the prejudices of those who conceived 
the men of colour to have been the original cause of the rebellion. A detach- 
ment sent against them from Port-au-Prince was repulsed, and the enemy 
advanced to set fire to the city; when, happily, some of the mulatto chiefs ob- 
tained its redemption, and began to express sentiments of amity, which was 
attributed, with some reason, to the tardiness of the negroes, at their head- 
quarters, in joining them. Anxious to embrace any opportunity of quelling the 
disturbance, a planter of eminence, M. de Jumecourt,?™ undertook to medi- 
ate between the two parties, and immediately obtained attention. The effect 
of this interference was a treaty, called the Concordat?” which was deter- 
mined upon the 12th of September, between the insurgents of the neighbour- 
hood, and the white inhabitants of Port-au-Prince. The principal provisions 
were, an amnesty for the past, and an engagement by the whites to admit 
the full force of the decree of the 15th May. The honourable conduct of the 
mulattoes in Cape Francois, precluded any objection in the General Assem- 
bly to the ratification of this agreement; from the most rational policy, they 
extended their care to those who had been born of enslaved parents; military 
companies of mulattoes were formed, in which men of colour, under certain 
regulations, were permitted to hold commissions. 

Thus circumstances, as far as respected the mulattoes, began to wear a 
promising appearance, when with that eagerness with which we supplant 
the remembrance of evil, by the prospect of good, the return of general quiet 
was contemplated. But a fresh and most tremendous blow was about to fall 
on this devoted colony, when least intended, by the mother country; whose 
regard, in this instance, similar to that of some animals, was not less fatal 
than its vengeance. This was the information, which at this time arrived in 
the colony, of the repeal of the decree of the 15th of May, which had been the 
original cause of the present disturbance, and which the white inhabitants 
had just agreed to allow. 

On the accounts arriving in France the beginning of September of the 
dreadful consequences attendant on this fatal decree, it excited general con- 
sternation throughout the trading districts; the loss of the colonial com- 
merce by a civil war between the whites and the mulattoes, was an event to be 
dreaded from the probable issue; still they never apprehended any interfer- 
ence of the negroes; so blind are we to the approach of political danger. The 
idea of immense losses, and all the accompanying considerations, produced 
such an effect upon the merchants principally concerned, that they, with 


100 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


their connections, did not fail to press the National Assembly by every mode 
of appeal and remonstrance, for the immediate relief of the planters from the 
restrictions then operating so destructively upon the interests of the mother 
country. There is in every thing a certain satiety, resulting from attainment 
or enjoyment, which produces relaxation; in the present instance it appears 
to have had a remarkable effect; for, of all the violent members of the society, 
“Amis des Noirs,” but few appear to have exerted themselves on the present 
occasion, and that few to have been as little attended to.” In fact, the popu- 
lar opinion seemed changed to another direction, and the Constituent As- 
sembly being on the point of dissolution, the obnoxious decree was annulled 
by the sanction of a large majority, at the moment in which it was becoming 
the medium of peace in the colony. 

When it became known in the colony none would believe, (nor indeed was 
it reasonable they should,) that it had not been brought about at the instance 
of the planters, and that in consequence they were unsafe with such decep- 
tive negotiators. They had already required repeated ratifications of the Con- 
cordat, but now every idea of amity vanished. The people of colour charged 
the whites with horrid duplicity, and came to the determination that one 
party or the other must be exterminated; accordingly, throughout the west- 
ern and southern provinces, they immediately had recourse to arms, and be- 
came masters of Port St. Louis, but from Port-au-Prince having been lately re- 
inforced, they could effect nothing more than a dreadful conflagration, which 
destroyed, at least, one third of the buildings. They established themselves 
at La Croix des Bouquets in considerable force. The contest here, assumed a 
more furious character; the negroes in several places joined the mulattoes, 
and in every action a dreadful slaughter ensued. At Cul de Sac two thousand 
negroes were left dead on the field, from being placed, as was frequently the 
case, in the front of the mulattoes. If there remained any invention in cruelty 
unexerted on former occasions it was now practised, with reiterated vigor, 
and each party strove how they could convince the other of the fertility of 
their cruelty, rather than of superiority of power. 

At length, about the middle of December, the three commissioners, who 
had been long before appointed at Paris, for the civil affairs of the colony, 
arrived, and every one began to hope from them a cessation of the accumu- 
lated horrors which everywhere made their appearance. They were named, 
Mirbeck, Roume, and St. Leger, the former two had been advocates in the 
parliament of Paris, and the latter (a native of Ireland) a surgeon by profes- 
sion. They were neither of them in a situation of life which warranted the ap- 
pointment, but had arisen through accident, in the confusion of the revolu- 
tion. They were received with every degree of submission, on the part of the 


CHAPTER III 101 


governor and inhabitants, by military honors, and a procession to the cathe- 
dral. 

No sooner were these men in full possession of their offices, than, after 
announcing the new French constitution,” and the decree of the 22d Sep- 
tember, (as if every step was to be marked by some additional misfortune,) 
they proclaimed a general amnesty and pardon to every description of revolt- 
ers who should lay down their arms, come in within a prescribed time and 
take the oaths. This measure lost the desired effect with the mulattoes, from 
being accompanied by the repeal of the decree in their favour; in the opinion 
of the whites, it justified their enormities; and, tempted the negroes who yet 
remained faithful, to join those who experienced such an indemnification. 
The commissioners could not expect to obtain the confidence of the inhabi- 
tants, as Mirbeck resigned himself to every kind of low debauchery, while St. 
Leger employed himself in levying contributions wherever he found an op- 
portunity. The third exerted himself with honesty to the duties prescribed to 
him, but wanting ability, and acting with colleagues of the character already 
described, could accomplish very little. The effect of these circumstances, 
which rendered them contemptible (and being without means to enforce 
authority), was their return to France, separately, after a residence of three 
months only. 

It was, however, during the stay of the commissioners, or immediately be- 
fore their arrival, that, in consequence of a resolution of the General Colonial 
Assembly, copies of the deposition of Ogé, given during the twenty-four hours 
he was respited, were obtained from the Register of the Council of the Cape; 
but not till they had been imperiously demanded. By these it was found, that, 
if instead of being suppressed, as beforementioned, the evidence had been 
promptly and decisively acted upon, all the horrors which had blackened the 
colony for the last nine months might have been to a great degree, if not en- 
tirely prevented. He asserts upon oath as follows: 

“That in the commencement of the month of February preceding, if the 
rivers had not overflowed their banks, there would have been a rising of the 
people of colour, who were to have fallen upon the town of the Cape in con- 
siderable numbers; that they were then re-united to the number of 11,000 
men, from Mirebalais, Artibonite, Limbé, Ouanaminthe, Grande Riviére, and 
other parts of the colony: that, at the same time, one hundred men of colour 
left the Cape for the purpose of joining this band: that he was certain that 
the authors of this revolt were the Declains, free negroes of Grande Riviére, 
now under accusation; Dumas and Yvon, free negroes; Bitozin, a free Spanish 
mulatto; Peter Godard, and John Baptiste, his brother, free negroes; Legrand, 
and Toussaint Mazeau, free negroes; Peter Mauzi, Ginga Lapaire, Charles 


102 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Lamadieu, the Sabourins, John Peter Goudy, Joseph Lucas, free mulattoes; 
and Maurice, a free negro, all under accusation. 

“That the grand movers of rebellion down the coast were, Daguin, under 
accusation, rebel, of Mirebalais; Pinchinat and Labastille, under accusation: 
that the most violent partizans of the revolt, who had moved in large parties, 
were those who had shone in the environs of St. Marc, and who were en- 
deavouring to excite it again: that there were at that moment many people 
of colour in different quarters, who were very resolute to maintain their 
projects, notwithstanding the number of those who had lost their lives by en- 
gaging timidly in the cause: that he remembered at present the name of one 
only, the son of La Place, a free quadroon, whose sister he had seen in the 
prisons, and quitting Limbé to go and raise recruits in the quarter of Ouana- 
minthe; that these recruits, and risings of people of colour, were continued 
there under the countenance of Fleury and Hirondelle Viard, deputies of the 
people of colour to the National Assembly, the one residing at Mirebalais, and 
the other in the quarter of Grande Rivière. 

“That assemblies were yet held in the subterraneous passages near La Créte 
à Mareau, and the district of Giromen, in the parish of Grande Rivière; and 
that if he could be conducted to these places, he would strive hard to take the 
chiefs of the rebellion: that the agitation in which he found himself under his 
present circumstances, did not permit him to enter into more circumstantial 
details: that he would acquaint us with the remainder when he became a little 
more tranquil: that it occurred to him at the moment, that Castaing, a free 
mulatto of this dependency, is not concerned in any manner in the present 
affair, but that if his brother Ogé had followed the persuasion of Castaing, he 
would have been brought into much greater extremities.” 

The commissioners for taking the deposition then stated, that Ogé having 
heard the above read on the day after it was made, and being again sworn, 
he confirmed it in every respect, adding, “That the two Didiers, brothers, 
free mulattoes, whom he had seen but that time, and that John Peter Gerard 
and— Caton, free mulattoes of the Cape, were employed to gain a party of the 
Grande Riviére; that they kept together by the day, and dispersed at night.” 

They mention, that on being confronted with James Lucas, who had ac- 
cused him, of threatening to hang him, he said, “it was necessary to tell them 
why Lucas had not insisted upon his explaining the reason of that threat, lest 
it should cost him his life: that the said Lucas had been always foremost in 
every perpetration of horror, the most active seducer of the blacks, and pro- 
moter of massacre, and had of necessity been restrained by him several times, 
on occasions which he repeated. 

“That Fleury, Perisse, and L'Hirondelle Viard, arriving in, the colony, the 


CHAPTER III 103 


two former were landed at Aquin, and left at the house of Dupont, but that 
L'Hirondelle Viard proceeded to the Cape. 

“That La Place, whose father was then in prison for raising recruits at 
Ouanaminthe, was of the number of those who marched from Limbé against 
the Cape; that to avoid suspicion, he went to Port Margot, where he lay con- 
cealed for several days; that the senior La Place had told him that he knew his 
neighbour, who was a white man, would not inform against him, though he 
knew all his proceedings; that he was sure Girardeau, then in prison, would 
declare nothing, because he was too much his friend to betray him; and that, 
if he were denounced, he should be forced to denounce many others, both in 
Limbé and other quarters. 

“That he had omitted to mention, on the subject of Lucas seducing the 
slaves, that Peter Maury had brought thirty slaves to Lucas, whom Ogé and 
his brother sent away again, the people of colour saying that it was a future 
supply; that he had on the same occasion a dispute with the tallest of the 
Didiers, whom he wished to fight with pistols, on account of his treasons; 
that he had seen a short note written by Peter Maury to John Francis Tes- 
siers, by which he signified, that he continued to collect together, and that 
the negro Coquin and the widow Castaing, armed with pistols mounted with 
silver, and a short sword which Maury had furnished, watched every thing 
that passed, and gave an account every night to Maury; which was all that 
the accused could declare at present, conjuring the commissioners to be per- 
suaded, that if it were possible to obtain mercy, he would willingly expose 
himself to every danger, to arrest the chiefs of the rebellion, and that in all 
circumstances he should prove his zeal and respect for the whites.”* 

He was, however, as before stated, immediately at the close of the confes- 
sion, hurried to execution, and the whole suppressed, without any proceed- 
ing upon it whatever. 

The matter of the deposition has been particularly given, for this reason, it 
exhibits the manner of the rebellion, and the quality of its leaders, who appear 
to have been well acquainted with its various manoeuvres; and if the princi- 
pal persons mentioned, particularly Pinchinat, Castaing, and Viard, had been 
arrested at that time, they would have been prevented forming their attack 
of the 25th August. — Thus does party, which, as before described, in divid- 
ing the colony of St. Domingo, unconsciously act against itself, and a want of 
political foresight ruin the best intentions. 


“See the original paper in the Appendix. [This French transcription entitled “Testament 
De Mort D’Ogé” can also be found in the additional notes section of Edwards’s Historical 
Survey. ] 


104 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


To add to the effects of the disclosure of this extraordinary error, the talents 
of the black leaders began to appear in an instance in the conduct of one, Jean 
Francois, whose followers having destroyed all the provision grounds, and de- 
voured all the cattle on the plain, he compelled them to plant in the moun- 
tainous districts provisions for their future subsistence; thus judiciously pre- 
paring for an indeterminate prolongation of the war. 

In the mother country fresh changes continuing to take place, new horrors 
were prepared for this unhappy colony from that quarter. The jacobin party, 
and the society of Amis des Noirs, were, at this period, resuming a powerful 
ascendancy, and on the 29th of February, Garan de Coulon proposed an abro- 
gation of the last decree, (of September 24,) and a general amnesty through- 
out the French colonies; the formation of new colonial assemblies, whose 
opinions were to be submitted to them, and who should particularly aid in 
the abolition of negro slavery. This inconsistent plan fell immediately to the 
ground; but it gave birth to another, about two months after, which was con- 
sidered little more beneficial to the miserable inhabitants of the colony. 

The decree of the 4th of April consisted, as related to St. Domingo, of the 
following items; after an acknowledgment of the political equality of the free 
negroes and people of colour with the whites: 

I. A re-election of colonial and parochial assemblies, after the mode of the 
decree of the 8th March 1790, and the subsequent instructions. 

II. The eligibility of free negroes and people of colour to votes and seats in 
the legislature, upon certain qualifications mentioned in the fourth article of 
these instructions.2? 

III. IV. V. VI. VII. Three civil commissioners to be named, to enforce the 
decree, to dissolve the present colonial assemblies; to take every measure for 
convoking the others, and establishing peace and order; to determine provi- 
sionally upon all questions relating thereto, conditionally reserving an appeal 
to the National Assembly; to procure correct information of the authors of 
the troubles; to send the guilty to France for accusation, transmitting con- 
stantly minutes of their proceedings, and of the evidence they collect; to call 
forth the public force to their protection, or the execution of orders. 

VIII. A sufficient force of National Guards to be sent to the colonies for the 
various purposes. 

IX. X. The Colonial Assembly to transmit their sentiments on all subjects 
to the mother country; and to send delegates with them proportional to the 
population. 

XI. All former decrees, not hostile to the present, to continue in force. 

To perform its functions, three commissioners, named Sonthonax, Pol- 
verel, and Ailhaud,””° were appointed, (who were of the most violent of the 
jacobin party,) and with them a force of eight thousand men, under officers 


CHAPTER III 105 


whose principles were well known. M. Blanchelande was superseded by 
M. D’Esparbes,*" under the title of commander in chief. The commissioners 
arrived at Cape Francois on the 13th of September. They found the governor 
and the Colonial Assembly involved in disputes, and therefore sent him pris- 
oner to France, and prepared for the first article of their decree to be carried 
into effect. 

The arrival of these men, (from the unfavourable impressions produced by 
their predecessors,) instead of causing peace in the colony, which appears 
to be the first intention of the new decree, produced an effect entirely oppo- 
site. Amidst such a contrariety of enactions as had agitated them from the 
mother country the result of men coolly sitting down to provide remedies for 
the worst of circumstances, at so great a distance from the scene of action, 
and unaffected by its immediate difficulties, the people were in doubt what 
was intended by the new commission, they sent delegates from all quarters 
to inquire their intentions; some had concluded that they were merely come 
to exact money, but all had an indifferent opinion of their projected opera- 
tions. The commissioners answered generally, and certainly with dissimula- 
tion, that their views went no farther than to enforce the decree of the 4th 
of April, in favor of the people of colour, and to settle the future state of the 
colony, so as to ensure its permanence. 

Notwithstanding this declaration, the inhabitants were not perfectly sat- 
isfied of their probity, and, when they found that the commissioners corre- 
sponded with the mulatto chiefs in all parts of the colony, they did not con- 
ceal their mistrust. In consequence the commissioners immediately avowed 
their intentions, and, strengthened by the co-operation of the people of 
colour, declared themselves the protectors of the negroes, and mulattoes, 
and seized the persons and effects of those who were most eager to oppose 
their measures. Many were sent to France, among whom were the superior 
officers of the regiment of the Cape. 

When the white inhabitants denied the election of the new Colonial As- 
sembly, they instituted an intermediate commission (commission intermedi- 
aire) as a legislative council, formed of twelve persons, six of whom had been 
members of the last assembly, and six mulattoes. To these they delegated a 
part of their power, chiefly for financial purposes. With that promptitude for 
which the reign of the jacobins in France was distinguished, when the gover- 
nor D’Esparbes claimed a share of dominion, he was arrested, and conveyed 
to France as a state-prisoner: when four of the white members of the inter- 
mediate commission objected to a financial measure of M. Sonthonax, he 
commended their frankness, invited them to supper; and, when they came, 
they were surrounded by a detachment of military, and conveyed on board 
of ship as state-prisoners. One of them was taken prisoner in the ship in 


106 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


which he was confined, and brought to England, where Mr. Edwards saw and 
rendered him service.” Another of the triumvirate”? dissenting from the 
union, more timely seceded from his situation, and returned voluntarily to 
the mother-country. 

The affairs of France, now drawing towards an apparent crisis, occupied 
the Executive Government so fully, as to leave the two commissioners, Son- 
thonax and Polverel, absolute masters of the colony. They eagerly embraced 
every advantage of such enormous power, which was increased by the attach- 
ment of the military, and a considerable portion of the revolters, whom they 
had found means to secure to their interest. The same scenes which occupied 
the whole of France at this period, were acted again in St. Domingo. The in- 
habitants complained in the bitterest manner of their wrongs, but it produced 
no other amendment, than the appointment, as governor, of M. Galbaud,?™ a 
respectable officer of artillery, and a proprietor in the colony, whom they dis- 
patched (on the declaration of war against Great Britain and Holland), with 
directions to put the colony in a proper state of defence against a foreign 
enemy. 

Again were the arrangements of the French government respecting this 
unhappy colony, the cause of commotion and bloodshed. When M. Galbaud 
arrived with his suite at the Cape, they were received with transport by the 
municipality and the inhabitants, immediately took the oaths, and entered on 
his government; but when the commissioners, who (at the time of his land- 
ing) were quelling an insurrection in the western province, found he was 
invested with powers independent of their authority, they immediately set 
about disrobing him; and the readiest way being, by an existing decree, which 
prohibited any proprietor of an estate in the colony from holding the gov- 
ernment, they attacked and defeated his claims on that score. They ordered 
him to depart on board the sloop La Normande, for the purpose of return- 


ing to France, and invited M. de la Salle? 


whom they had previously made 
commandant at Port-au-Prince, to receive the command of the colony in the 
name of the French republic. 

The indignity thus offered to Galbaud was not tacitly received by his 
brother, who collected from the inhabitants, the Cape militia, and the sea- 
men in the harbour, a strong party to support his authority. At the expira- 
tion of seven days the two brothers landed, at the head of a powerful party, 
and proceeded in array towards the government house, where the commis- 
sioners were prepared, with a greater force, to receive them; being defended 
by the people of colour, a body of regulars, and a piece of cannon. A bloody 
contest ensued; but, in consequence of the seamen getting possession ofa 
wine-cellar, the governor’s party were compelled to retire and take refuge in 
the royal arsenal, where they remained the whole of the night. In the ensu- 


CHAPTER III 107 


ing morning the governor issued a proclamation, inviting all good citizens 
to join him, and several skirmishes took place between the two parties, but 
without any remarkable occurrence, till Galbaud’s brother being taken pris- 
oner by the commissioners, and the son of Polverel by the party of Galbaud, 
it was proposed by the governor to exchange the one for the other. “My son,” 
replied Polverel, “knows his duty, and is prepared to die in the service of the 
republic!?2#6 

The fatal stroke still remained to be put to the fate of St. Domingo, as a 
colony of France. The white inhabitants had, from the time of the arrival of 
the commissioners, anticipated the measure; yet with that want of discern- 
ment which had led them into their difficulties; thereby creating a degree 
of stupor amongst them, inasmuch that they had not been able to attempt 
any method to divert the blow.* This was the emancipation of all the slaves in 
the colony. When the intentions of Galbaud became known to the commis- 
sioners, and that he was supported by so large a body of seamen, they im- 
mediately dispatched agents to call to their assistance the revolted negroes, 
with the offer of a free pardon for the past, the plunder of the city at present, 
and perfect freedom in future. The first to whom they applied among the 
leaders, and those of the most conspicuous eminence amidst the blacks, re- 
fused the invitation; but another, named Macaya,” formerly a negro slave, 
accepted it, and on the 21st, about noon, entered the town with upwards of 
three thousand slaves, and begun an indiscriminate slaughter. M. Galbaud 
and his adherents had, despairing of success, on the same morning, retired to 
the ships, to which the whole of the whites endeavoured to follow, when their 
retreat being interrupted by the mulattoes, all that could not escape were 
immediately murdered. This confusion and slaughter continued through the 
whole of the two succeeding days, at the end of which they set fire to the prin- 
cipal buildings, and more than half of the city was consumed. The commis- 
sioners themselves, astonished at the devastation they had occasioned, and 
intimidated by the conduct of the allies they had chosen, sought protection 
under the cover of a ship of the line. 

Nor, were the mulattoes less amazed and vexed, when they found that the 
exertions against the whites, which they supposed confined to their interest 


*“Pavais écrit dans la colonie, dès 1792, que c'était le plan confié aux commissaires. On 
pouvait employer des mesures vigoureuses pour l'empêcher, elles étaient indiquées, &c, 
Mais l'esprit de vertige qui a accompagné tout ce qui s’est fait pour empêcher les maux 
de la révolution eut lieu dans cette circonstance, &c.” Charmilly, Let. p. 65. [I had written, 
while still living in the colony, as soon as 1792, that this was the plan given to the commis- 
sioners to execute. Vigorous methods could be employed to forestall it; such methods were 
even necessary, etc. But the stupor that accompanied everything done to prevent the ills 
of the revolution occurred in this circumstance, etc] 


108 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


only, extended to the liberation of their own slaves, on whose labour their 
fortunes depended; they now perceived that they had been made the tools of 
the Amis des Noirs, in obtaining their darling object, the emancipation of the 
whole body of negroes. There is an enthusiasm and a fanaticism in politics, 
as well as religion, equally dangerous in both, which, with an unaccountable 
bigotry to their projects, must have led the society to urge, such excesses; 
they could not have originally desired the effusion of human blood only, as 
hath been asserted, however strongly they might afterwards have imbibed a 
spirit of revenge against their opponents. — Such is the spirit of Jacobinism, 
endless, and undirected by any social principle. 

The effect of the declaration of freedom to the slaves themselves, was such 
as might be naturally expected from a people of their character and condition. 
A considerable part remained in their former situation with their masters, 
in preference to a change; a greater number joined the party of the commis- 
sioners, who manumitted them; and, perhaps, the greatest number, fearful 
their liberty would not be permanent, RETIRED IN SAVAGE BODIES TO THE 
MOUNTAINS. 

During the four years, in which divisions and tumult had reigned in St. 
Domingo, many emigrations took place to the continent of North America, 
and to the several neighbouring islands. These, of course, increased as secu- 
rity grew less, and more particularly since the first revolt of the slaves in the 
northern province. To them were now added Galbaud and his party, who met, 
as the others had done, an asylum wherever they fled. The principal planters, 
however, still remained behind, attached to the colony, either lingering with 
hopes of returning tranquillity, or planning schemes for the independence 
of the island. Among them were some, conversant with the economy of poli- 
tics, more active and able than those who had hitherto been distinguished; 
who looked forward from the year 1791, to some arrangement with the crown 
of Great Britain, that should place the island, and its proprietors of their de- 
scription, under the government, and protection of that puissant nation; and 
there were a few others desirous of attaching the colony to Spain. They all 
saw, in the last desperate proceeding of the commissioners, nothing left to 
hope for from the judgment of the mother country. The latter, therefore, em- 
ployed a party to apply to the government of Spanish St. Domingo, who were 
unsuccessful. The former, with more judgment, determined upon making 
a formal application to Great Britain on the same subject: for this purpose 
they commissioned their colleague, M. de Charmilly, a man of strong mental 
powers, and of great activity, to communicate with the British ministry, and 
to bring their plans, so long in agitation, to an issue. 

This gentleman, it will have appeared from the preceding part of this chap- 
ter, possessed a considerable interest in the island, and an extensive knowl- 


CHAPTER III 109 


edge of its concerns, which had given him a share in several of its legislative 
bodies, where he appears to have long communicated his inclination towards 
the measure now confided to him. 

The British ministry, hitherto deaf to any proposition of attempting the 
capture of St. Domingo, became rather more inclined from the occurrence of 
a war, which was commenced against the new government of France. More 
than a negative consent it could scarcely be called, for the arrangement was 
left to the option of the government of Jamaica, and, in fact, whether any 
thing should be ventured its attainment. An intercourse of the most honor- 
able nature to the British character, had already taken place between the un- 
happy colonists of St. Domingo and those of Jamaica, who raised consider- 
able subscriptions for their aid, and applied them in the way best calculated 
for their benefit, under the friendly auspices of General Williamson, *# the 
governor; and when allured by the professions of the governor of Spanish 
St. Domingo," they thought they could succeed better there, they were for- 
warded according to their wishes, Captain Rowley??? undertaking their safe 
convoy. Mr. Henry Shirley,” of the House of Representatives, appears to 
have exerted himself in a manner which deserves the highest eulogy. When 
the Spanish government refused to afford them an asylum in their island, 
M. de Charmilly lost no time in setting off for Jamaica, and by his represen- 
tation of the state of St. Domingo, of the disposition of the planters towards 
the British nation, and the facility of obtaining some ground with a very 
small force, he prevailed upon General Williamson to grant him the aid he 
required; a force certainly inadequate to the invasion of such an island under 
any circumstances. 

The French commissioners, Sonthonax and Polverel, who still retained a 
disputable power in St. Domingo, were quickly acquainted with the intended 
invasion, and began to prepare for it accordingly. Their force consisted of the 
remnant of the troops they brought with them from France, a body of whites 
who continued attached to their cause, and the slaves which had joined them, 
of which power little could be judged, being dispersed throughout the prov- 
inces. To render themselves in a better state to repel the invaders, they had re- 
course to a still more determinate step, that of procuring the aid of the whole 
of the negro slaves. They,” therefore, declared by proclamation, “That every 
kind of slavery was abolished, and that the negroes were thenceforward to 
consider themselves, and to be considered as free citizens.”t 


*It was signed only by Polverel, who was alone at Port-au-Prince, from whence it was 
issued. Sonthonax was in the northern province. 

ŸIt has been asserted that they were still to exercise the same labour, but in the condi- 
tion of annual servants. Those acquainted with the proclamation, recollect no such excep- 


110 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 

The inhabitants of St. Domingo, at this period, might be considered under 
the following classes: — 

1. The principal, and most intelligent of the planters, who desiring tranquil- 
lity, and the renovation of their property, (which they could not expect from 
the distracted state of France,) looked to the protection of a powerful nation, 
and perhaps most to that of England. 

2dly. The remainder of the white planters, who had become republicans, 
and chose rather to support the commissioners as the representatives of the 
republic, probably from principle, than to adopt any other country, and to 
sacrifice their immediate interest to their allegiance: — the impartiality of his- 
tory demands that this class should not receive any harsher description. 

3dly. A number of those persons, to be found in all countries, particu- 
larly when under embarrassed circumstances, who, having nothing to lose, 
and frequently without principle, are ripe for enterprize; many of whom, 
by stratagem, or other means, had obtained the property of absent planters, 
availing themselves of the state of the colony, to their own aggrandizement. 
The mulattoes I consider as partaking of each of these characters: and, 

4thly. The emancipated slaves, the most important body of the whole, in 
whom were comprised almost every description of character. Some of them 
had already exhibited talents of a superior nature, both in civil and military 
government, among the revolters; others had proved themselves equal to 
many of the higher purposes of life, and they were possessed at least of emi- 
nent physical power. 

If we might pause for a moment, to consider the propriety, or impropriety 
of the accession of the British government to the proposition of M. de Char- 
milly, we might lavish censure on those who could, with such small hopes 
of success, enter into a plan of such extent, with so little information on 
its nature, and such small means for its execution; but we will leave it for 
the partizan, with every local or supposed advantage of judging, to condemn 
those without; and who, in the complex dominion of a country with many 
dependencies, and with as many jarring interests to reconcile, must be some- 
times hurried into arrangements which may not prove ultimately successful, 
notwithstanding their discrimination. Sometimes, too, ambition may be sup- 


tions, which would, in fact, have rendered the abolition a nullity. [Of the “Decree abol- 
ishing slavery in the North of Saint-Domingue” (1793), Edwards writes that the Proclama- 
tion “expatiates upon the necessity of labour, and tells the negroes that they must engage 
to work as usual, from year to year; but that they are at liberty to make choice of their re- 
spective masters,” 143n.] 


CHAPTER III 111 


posed to intrude; nor will the brave and intelligent De Charmilly complain of 
having also attributed to him, in no slight degree, 


“The glorious fault of angels and of gods!”??? 


That those who had determined on adopting the British government, were 
prepared to sustain their engagements, there is no doubt, but they formed 
one class only of the numerous remains of a vast population; while the re- 
mainder had the strongest motives for opposition —interest, party, and re- 
lief from slavery. If, even the two former ideas could have been overcome, 
every colonist, or other individuals acquainted with colonial affairs might 
have known, from the example of the black Charribes of St. Vincent, or the 
Maroons in Jamaica, that the last was not to be easily subdued.” Retaining 
all the advantages they had derived, in many instances, from the partiality of 
favorable masters, and particularly in the experience of the different contro- 
versies, and conflicts that had taken place, they had become, what is impos- 
sible, without an intercourse with them to conceive; an unique people. 

It was hoped, however, that interest might assimilate the whole of the 
whites; that the hostility of the people of colour might be nearly exhausted; 
and that the negroes were not so far alienated from their duty, as never to be 
expected to return; still much was left, with great reason, to the bravery and 
ability of those who were to conduct the enterprize. 

Under such circumstances, an armament was formed at Jamaica, com- 
posed of the 13th regiment of foot, seven companies of the 49th regiment, 
and a detachment of artillery, under Captain Smith, furnishing about 870 
rank and file. With the first division of these, consisting of about 679 rank 
and file, Lieutenant-Colonel Whitlocke? arrived at Jeremie on the 19th of 
September, and took possession of the town and harbour on the following 
morning. Agents from M. de Charmilly had already arranged every point, 
the troops therefore disembarked without the smallest opposition. British 
colours were hoisted on the forts, with royal salutes, and the inhabitants im- 
mediately swore allegiance to the king of Great Britain. Commodore Ford”? 
having at that time the command on the Jamaica station, accompanied in the 
Europa man-of-war, the transport of the troops, and assisted in the necessary 
formalities of receiving the submission of the place. The Mole of Cape St. 
Nicholas, (the Gibraltar, or key of the Antilles,) immediately followed. To it, 


*See Dallas’s History of the Maroons, also Edwards’s British West Indies. 

+Now Major-General Whitlocke. [John Whitelocke (1757-1833) led an expedition to the 
Western coast of St. Domingo. After an initial setback at Tiburon, he received reinforce- 
ments and went on to conquer nearly the entire western coast of the French colony. ] 


112 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


on the next day, according to the pre-arrangement, the commodore directed 
his course, and, on the 22nd, landing the marines only, took possession of 
the fortress and harbour. This port was soon after supplied by the grenadier 
company of the 13th regiment, to which was added the second division of the 
armament, comprising five companies, of forty men each. The town of St. 
Nicholas, however, did not capitulate, for its inhabitants were hostile to the 
British, and immediately joined the republican army. 

The great extent of important coast thus coming into the possession of the 
English, excited the most sanguine prospects, and determined all parties in 
the prosecution of an enterprize which promised such brilliant success. We 
shall quit the exertions of the commissioners, who were at present employed 
in defensive operations about the capital, while their new allies, the slaves, 
were forming a separate interest in the interior, to follow the new possessors 
of the south-east and north-west districts of the colony in their united move- 
ments with the brave colonists, by whom they appear to have been cordially 
and respectably joined. 

The neighbouring port to Jeremie, first attracted the attention of Colonel 
Whitlocke, who was instructed, that it would be of importance to the secu- 
rity of La Grand Anse. He therefore sailed for Tiburon with his whole force, 
and arrived in the bay on the 4th day of October; a planter, named Morin 


Duval,?4 


was to proceed by land with five hundred colonial troops.??* and 
to form a junction at an appointed spot; but, unfortunately, a piece of can- 
non compelled Colonel Whitlocke to disembark three miles distant, and the 
wind intercepted the signal of Duval, who in consequence wandered about 
the whole of the day, in imminent danger, with a faithful and intelligent negro 
called John Vina,?”° whose men formed a part of the five hundred. At the 
same time, a reinforcement of cavalry from Aux Cayes joining the enemy, 
Colonel Whitlocke was obliged to return, with a loss of twenty men, without 
effecting his purpose. 

A small check is sufficient to turn the tide of joy when it is full set in, con- 
sequently this defeat was magnified in the opinion of those, who had before 
only to step into possession of wealthy towns, and with well-filled magazines. 
It had the effect of disheartening the troops; to whom General Williamson 
sent as encouragement, till reinforcements, which were expected from Eng- 
land, should arrive, the remaining part of the 49th regiment, the 2oth regi- 
ment, and the ist battalion of the Royals. This addition not only served to 
cheer the drooping spirits of the soldiery, but to increase the confidence in 
the planters, as to the intention of Great Britain following up the enterprize; 
accordingly, the parishes of Jean Rabell, St. Marc, Arcahaye, and Boucassin, 
became attached to the territory of Great Britain. From this period until the 


CHAPTER III 113 


middle of January, no farther advance was made; when the colonists, who 
had established a port at Irois, a few miles distant from Tiburon, in order 
to overawe that place, having, for security, erected a fort in the centre of a 
marsh, which considerably affected their health; they became impatient to 
re-attempt that port, and the Privy Council of La Grand Anse eagerly solicited 
Colonel Whitlocke for the purpose. On the 21st of January, therefore, the 
commodore received the troops on board at Jeremie; and on the 2d of Feb- 
ruary, in the evening, they arrived off Cape Tiburon. The commodore stood 
out to sea, and Capt. Rowley, a brave and sensible officer, had the manage- 
ment of the attack; while Lieutenant-Colonel Spencer,” no way inferior in 
any quality, commanded the troops, which consisted partly of colonists, and 
a detachment of the British army. The enemy appeared in considerable force, 
but the fire of the ships cleared the beach; they came forward again, and di- 
rected their musquetry at the boats; when the troops landing, and forming 
instantly, with the gallant Colonel Spencer at their head, entirely dispirited 
the defenders. Their line was routed with considerable slaughter, and one 
hundred and fifty surrendered prisoners of war. In this, as in the former in- 
stance, they found the magazine well stored with ammunition. The loss, on 
the part of the victors, was extremely small. 

By this victory the whole of the bay, or bight of Leogane, became under 
the command of the British squadron; and nothing was wanting but an addi- 
tional armament, which was constantly expected, to secure Port-au-Prince, 
the capital of the colony, to which every one looked with an anxious eye. 

In the interim, however, it was conceived expedient to obtain the posses- 
sion of the ancient town of Port-Paix, an important post on the northern side 
of the island; and Colonel Whitlocke was induced to attempt procuring its 
surrender by the offer of a sum of money to the general who commanded in 
it. This was M. Laveaux,””” a man of broken fortune, though of a good family, 
who had been long in the service, and had a troop of dragoons before the 
revolution. Whether Colonel Whitlocke formed his calculation alone upon 
this circumstance, or, as hath been mentioned, his orders were improperly 
executed, cannot, at present, be determined; but, it is certain, that General 
Laveaux possessed considerable confidence from the republican army, and 
that he did not abuse it. The offer was made in a letter sent with a flag, and 
5000 I. the sum stipulated. He silently read the letter, and asked the officer, 
upon his honour, if he knew its contents; upon being answered in the nega- 


“Now Major-General Spencer. [Sir Brent Spencer (1760-1828) would later distinguish 
himself fighting against the French in Egypt and Spain. Prior to the British evacuation of 
St. Domingo, he commanded British and colonial troops against Toussaint. ] 


114 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


tive, he told him, that, if he had known them, he should have immediately 
been hung on a gibbet. He then read the letter aloud to those around him, 
and returned the following answer: — 

“You have endeavoured to dishonour me in the eyes of my troops, by sup- 
posing me so vile, flagitious, and base, as to be capable of betraying my trust 
for a bribe: this is an affront, for which you owe me personal satisfaction, 
and I demand it, in the name of honour. Wherefore, previous to any general 
action, I offer you single combat until one of us fall; leaving to you the choice 
of arms, either on foot, or horseback. Your situation as my enemy, on the part 
of your country, did not give you a right to offer me a personal insult; and, as 
a private person, I ask satisfaction for an injury done me by an individual" 

Of the character of Gen. Laveaux, a midst the conflicts of party, in which 
he was situated, it is difficult to judge. But he certainly possessed talents; 
and, if there were no other cause for this proposition than his circumstances, 
the misfortunes of a brave man should be respected. The situation and char- 
acter of Col. Whitlocke, however, demanded an attention to every expedient 
object.t 

The fortress of L’Acul, in the vicinity of Leogane, was next invested, and 
carried on the 19th of February, but with the loss of two valuable officers. At 
four in the morning, the flank-companies, a detachment of the royal artillery, 
and of the 13th regiment, with some colonial troops, two five half-inch how- 
itzers, and two four-pounders, marched from Leogane, under the command 
of Colonel Whitlocke; while two hundred colonial troops, and a few British 
artillery, under the orders of the Baron de Montalembert,?”* which were pre- 
viously embarked, were to land and attack the fort from the sea at an hour ap- 
pointed. Colonel Whitlocke moved forward on the great road, and took post 
just without cannon-shot; while Capt. Vincent, with the light infantry of the 
49th, and about 80 colonial troops, were dispatched by a higher road to com- 
bine their effects with those of Montalembert, in favour of the main body. 
But, unfortunately, from the intoxication of the captain of one of the trans- 
ports, notwithstanding the ability and propriety of the other, the King, Mon- 
talembert could not be landed, and all the service they could perform, was 


*This answer is copied from Edwards, who is not contradicted by De Charmilly, though 
its terms differ from another copy in the possession of the author. [See Edwards, Historical 
Survey, 152-53. | 

Though the impartiality we wish to preserve on all occasions demands that the preced- 
ing facts should be fairly stated, we wish to offer a sincere tribute of respect to the conduct 
of Major-General Whitlocke, as an officer of undoubted bravery, honour, and talents of the 
highest order. [Edwards notes, “Colonel Whitelocke, I suppose, rejected the challenge,” 
Edwards, Historical Survey, 153.] 


CHAPTER III 115 


that of diverting the attention of 200 negroes and mulattoes, who were kept 
on the beach to receive them. The enemy cannonaded from seven till eleven, 
when Colonel Whitlocke ordered Captain Smith, with the howitzers and can- 
non, to advance, and fire upon the fort, supported by the light-infantry of 
the royal, and 13th regiments, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel 
Spencer. On the discovery of a failure on the sea-side, it was determined to 
storm the fort, and Colonel Spencer, with the grenadiers of the 49th, and 
light-infantry of the 13th, proceeded to join Captain Vincent on the Mountain- 
Road. Between four and five the two columns proceeded, and the main-body 
immediately received a heavy fire of cannon and musquetry. It was ordered 
to advance and gain the fort, which it executed with the utmost rapidity, and 
with more effect than could have been expected, by so small a party. After 
obtaining possession of the fort, considerable damage was sustained from the 
explosion of one of the buildings, which had been filled with combustibles 
by the commander, on finding he could no longer defend it. It was fired by a 
negro recently from the coast of Africa, who is supposed not to have known 
what he did, or, the use of powder; he set fire to an artillery-waggon on the 
spot, and perished, with thirteen privates of the besiegers and two officers, 
Capt. Morshead, of the 2oth grenadiers, who had been previously wounded 
in the body, and Lieutenant Caulfield, of the 62d. They were buried with mili- 
tary honours, attended by the British garrison. Lieutenant M“Kerras,??? of the 
engineers, and Captain Hutchinson, of the royals, though both wounded in 
the attack, continued on duty till the fort was carried. Lieutenant Tilnin, of 
the 20th grenadiers, was wounded, but recovered. 

Thus the first sharp action that was fought, ended successfully; but the 
same was not the case with the second, which occurred immediately after, 
though of less importance. This expedition was intended to punish the 
treachery of the German inhabitants of Bombarde, before described. It was 
composed chiefly of marines from the different ships, who were perform- 
ing the garrison-duty of the Mole with the regular troops, under the orders 
of Lieutenant-Colonel Spencer, and Lieutenant-Colonel Markham;?*° two 
Frenchmen accompanied them, M. Deneux,”*! the major of artillery, and 
Lieutenant-Colonel Charmilly, who was necessary every where, not only on 
account of the great responsibility under which he lay to all parties, but from 
the general want of knowledge, in the language of the country by the com- 
manders. 

The detachment set off at nine o'clock at night, and arrived at the re- 
doubt?*? about three in the morning, having marched fifteen miles in the 
woods and mountains. It was defended by 150 German soldiers, intrenched, 
with three pieces of cannon. They were relieving guard at the moment, when 


116 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the troops were discovered, and the alarm-gun fired. Colonel Markham, with 
half the detachment, attacked the redoubt in flank, while the remainder ap- 
proached the gate. The enemy suffered them to arrive within half-gun shot, 
when having challenged three times, calling— “Qui vive?” Colonel Spencer 
answered, “England!” and immediately the assailants received a fire, per- 
fectly well directed, and kept up with so much order and briskness, that the 
enterprize was obliged to be immediately abandoned. Several of the officers 
advanced as far as the ditch, supported by some grenadiers, but not being suf- 
ficiently numerous; all retired in confusion. M. De Charmilly (who recounts 
the affair) was at the side of the ditch, ten feet from the entrenchments, 
which served as a rampart, and was wounded by several musquet-shot: one 
ball struck the plate of his belt, and another the barrel of a brass-pistol in his 
pocket, either of which must have killed him. There were sixteen men killed, 
and twenty-six taken prisoners; the remainder retreated without any further 
misfortune than the hardships experienced by a small party, which I shall 
describe from the authority of the officer just mentioned;* the retreat being 
very precipitate, there was no signal to indicate it, so that many of the people 
strayed from the main body. 

A young and brave officer, Lieutenant Garstin, of the first regiment of royal 
English infantry, who was with his detachment, found, at day-break, that 
he had strayed from the road with eight men belonging to his company. All 
his endeavours to find it led him farther from it; when, towards the middle 
of the day, he fell in with a German patrole, consisting of six men, who de- 
sired him to surrender. He answered by threatening to fire upon them if they 
attacked him. Seeing him so determined, they contented themselves with 
following, while he continued to stray still farther from his intended point. 
They acquainted him with it, and again pressed his surrender, which was as 
constantly refused. The Germans, fatigued with following him over the dry 
and sandy plains, on the approach of night retired; they continued to wander, 
fainting with hunger, thirst, and fatigue; at the end of two days and a night, 
during which time two of the number died of want and weariness, having 
found nothing but the fruit of Indian fig-trees and aloes, they arrived, by a for- 
tunate chance, at the landing place of the Platform, a republican port, which 
had been destroyed three weeks before by Captain Rowley. Here they found 
an old abandoned fishing-boat, in which they embarked without provisions, 


*M. De Charmilly, though extremely and often justly severe with Mr. Edwards in the 
errors which crept into his Historical Survey, is, occasionally, rather incorrect himself in 
his descriptions: an instance of which, it is apprehended, occurs in the affair of Lieut. Gar- 
stin, as it also did in a transport which he calls the King Grey. 


CHAPTER III 117 


fresh water, or a sail, with very bad oars. They arrived on the morning of the 
third day at the entrance of the bay of the Mole St. Nicholas, from whence the 
fishermen brought them into the town. 

During this retreat from the enemy in one quarter, they were giving a re- 
pulse in another of considerable importance. One of the lieutenants of Rigaud, 
with 1500 men of different colours, had prepared to attack the important post 
of L’Acul de Leogane; on the day preceding the intended attack, they were 
intercepted by 400 men, (only 150 of whom were of the British legion, and 
the remainder of the militia of Leogane,) under the command of the Baron 
de Montalembert, who completely routed them, and took a piece of cannon. 
They charged with fixed bayonets, and upwards of 300 of the enemy lay dead 
upon the field. 

The same success occurred in the attack which was made by the mulatto 
officer Rigaud, of Aux Cayes, on the fort of Tiburon, the possession of which 
had cost so dear. His force consisted of 2000 men, chiefly revolted negroes, 
with two pieces of cannon, four-pounders. They surrounded the fort about 
three in the morning, and it was defended with much spirit till a quarter be- 
fore nine, notwithstanding the great battery being entirely dismounted, and 
a number of men killed and wounded by the explosion of a quantity of gun- 
powder, when the besieged (a party of whom, under the command of Jean 
Kina,” had before made a sortie on one side,) quitting the fort, routed the 
assailants with great slaughter, 170 of their number being left dead on the 
field. The pleasure of the victory, was damped, when it was found that out of 
the small number of British that were in the fort, 28 had fallen, besides 100 
of the colonial troops. This affair, notwithstanding, was one which conferred 
equal honor on all the forces, and the Chevalier de Sevré,”* in his dispatch on 
the occasion to Colonel Whitlocke, pays a tribute to the small garrison, which 
so distinguished itself on the occasion. 

Still, during these occasional successes, the general spirit of the colony 
began to droop, on perceiving, that during a period of eight months, not the 
smallest re-inforcement had arrived from Great Britain, nor was it only in 
fears, that this despondency and diffidence began to shew themselves, for a 
parish which, a few months before, had voluntarily adopted the protection 
of England, (that of Jean Rabell,}* compelled the officers of the garrison to 
deliver up their post to Laveaux; and it was much feared, that many others 
would follow their example. This defection was less felt, as between four and 
five thousand persons had returned to the plantations from their different 
asylums. 

At this moment, so temporarily inauspicious, when the British interests 
seemed devoted to contempt, on the 19th of May, the Belliqueux, the Irre- 


118 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


sistible, and the Fly sloop, cast anchor in the harbour of Cape St. Nicholas, 
with the 22d, 23d, and 41st regiments of infantry, under the command of 
Brigadier-General Whyte* All spirits were now resumed, the despondency 
which overwhelmed the colony disappeared, and all seemed, as from a gen- 
eral impulse, to expect the reduction of the capital of Port-au-Prince, and a 
considerable share of wealth from the capture. 

These troops were detached by General Sir Charles Grey?” from Guada- 
loupe, after the reduction of the French Windward Islands, where they had 
experienced a severe campaign, and where their services were yet wanted. 
Great evils were ascribed to the circumstance of withdrawing them—the 
loss of the island they left, and the occasion of the largest and most expen- 
sive armament that ever sailed from England to the West Indies, with other 
misfortunes.” 

Commodore Ford had, for a considerable time, blockaded the harbour of 
Port-au-Prince, to the great discouragement of the commissioners; on the 
arrival of this re-inforcement, although inferior to what had been hoped, it 
was considered best that the expectation of the inhabitants should not be dis- 
appointed. General Whyte, therefore, having landed his sick at St. Nicholas, 
received in their place 160 of the garrison, and proceeded to the rendez- 
vous, in the road of Arcahaye, on the 23d of May, to concert the enterprize 
with the Commodore, and receive such of the colonial troops as were to co- 
operate. On the 30th they sailed again, and arrived off Port-au-Prince in the 
evening. Notwithstanding the operations, in a warlike view, may not be of the 
first importance, it should be mentioned that the squadron comprized four 
ships of the line, the Europa, the Belliqueux, the Irresistible, and the Sceptre, 
three frigates, and four or five smaller vessels, the whole under the command 
of Commodore Ford. The British land-forces, under the orders of General 
Whyte, consisted of 1,465 rank and file, fit for duty, to whom were added 
2,000 colonial troops. It is proper to remark, that at this period the French 
inhabitants composing the latter corps, likewise chiefly supplied the Mole, St. 
Marc, Leogane, Jeremie, the camps Des Rivaux and Du Centre, and Tiburon, 
(on which place an attack was projected, by the mulatto chief Rigaud, from 
Aux Cayes.) 

The necessary preparations being made, the next morning a flag was sent, 
demanding the surrender of the town, which, not being admitted, it was de- 
termined to cannonade the fortress of Bizotton, which defended the great 
carriage road leading from Leogane to Port-au-Prince, which protected one 
part of the Bay, and in which were 500 men, eight pieces of heavy artillery, 


*Colonel Chalmers’s Remarks on the late War in St. Domingo, p. 21. 


CHAPTER III 119 


and two mortars. The fort was dismantled on the side next the sea in the 
course of the day, (May 31,) by two line of battle ships and a frigate, but on the 
land side remaining perfect, an assault became necessary. Colonel Spencer, 
with 300 British, and 500 colonial troops, were accordingly landed in the eve- 
ning, within a mile of the fort, and night soon approached, accompanied by 
the horrors of a most tremendous thunder-storm, and deluge of rain. A coun- 
cil of war was held, consisting of the Commander, the Baron de Montalem- 
bert, Colonel de Charmilly, and the brave Captain M‘Kerras of the engineers; 
when it was suggested by Colonel de Charmilly, who was best acquainted 
with the nature of the country, to attack with fixed bayonets, as the torrents 
from the elements would render the cannon and musquetry in the fort use- 
less, and drown the sound of the approaching assailants. Captain Daniel, of 
the 41st regiment, led the advanced guard, of only sixty men, and executed 
the plan with such vigor and judgment, that entering a breach, and bear- 
ing down all before them, (except those who begged and obtained mercy,) 
the fort was carried directly, to the astonishment even of the brave Colonel 
Spencer. Captain Daniel was severely wounded, and his second in command, 
Captain Wallace, died on the glacis,” as he had lived, full of bravery and 
honor. 

It is a subject of deep regret to the writer, from the nature of this work, not 
to be able to adorn his pages with the account of numerous actions which, 
could he have transmitted to posterity, would immortalize many whose 
names and heroism the various chances of war frequently consign to obliv- 
ion. It is sometimes necessary that the historian should select his characters 
with a view to dramatic effect, yet a place on the roll of fame should not be 
denied to any; as that is often considered the noblest reward for a life of per- 
severance and sorrow; and the most honorable incentive to future services of 
danger and national glory. 

The capture of Bizotton determined the fate of Port-au-Prince. The party 
remained in the fort till joined by the main body of the army from L’Arcahaye, 
which, one part by land, and the other by sea, made its approach on the side 
next the rich plain of Cul de Sac. On the 4th of June they arrived within three 
miles of the town, and, at ten in the morning, the detachment of Colonel 
Spencer marched to occupy a post on the heights behind the capital. When 
they had advanced about half way they were met by a mulatto woman, who 
acquainted them, to their surprize, with its evacuation. Colonel de Charmilly, 
with fifty of the colonial cavalry, were dispatched to ascertain the fact, which 
they found as she had stated; and they immediately took possession of the 
fort of the Gate of Leogane. About half an hour after, a cry was heard from 
a cellar in a very concealed situation, and upon the door being broke open, 


120 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


a negro was discovered, surrounded by barrels of gunpowder. The unhappy 
wretch had been placed there, according to the opinion of M. de Charmilly, 
the preceding night, to blow them up at a certain time, but his match being 
extinguished, his own life, as well as that of those who surrounded him, were 
thus spared by mere accident. 

The fort De L’Hôpital was the next to be taken possession of, which was ac- 
complished in the same manner, but with the appearances of imminent dan- 
ger they escaped with their lives; for here the commissioners had planned 
their principal blow to destroy the new masters of the place, which had been 
defeated by the rain just mentioned. A train of powder was found reaching 
from the magazine, (where several of the barrels had their bottoms knocked 
out, and the powder strewed about the floor,) to the thickets behind the fort; 
the whole, fortunately, was wet, and by precaution every accident was pre- 
vented. 

Fort Robin, in which were between two and three hundred men, who had 
refused to fly with the commissioners, readily surrendered to M. de Char- 
milly. The Baron de Montalembert was sent to take possession of Fort St. 
Joseph, which commanded the gate of the town leading to the Cul de Sac, and 
a detachment of troops from Leogane went to the Fort de St. Claire. Thus, in a 
few hours, the English were in full possession of Port-au-Prince. The commo- 
dore, who had entered the road, took possession of Fort de l’Islet, and sent in 
a British flag, which De Charmilly hoisted at Port Robin, with sensations that 
are easier to be felt than described. “I considered,” says he, “this happy event 
as a recompense accorded me by Fate for all my labours, and all my troubles 
in the salvation of St. Domingo”? At six o'clock General Whyte arrived. 

Such was the capture of this important capital, whose character and wealth 
had tempted every person employed in the intended conquest of the island. 
Within the compass of its lines were one hundred and thirty one pieces of 
cannon regularly mounted in batteries. In the harbour were twenty-two ves- 
sels laden with sugar, indigo, and coffee, of which thirteen were from three to 
five hundred tons burthen, besides seven thousand tons of shipping in ballast, 
in value amounting to 400,000 |. A booty much more considerable was con- 
veyed away by the commissioners, who loaded two hundred mules with their 
riches, and carried away near two thousand persons in their train. Having 
previously arranged their affairs, and finding the people of colour, (of whose 
aid, they had only intended to avail themselves temporarily,) possessed of the 
whole natural strength of the island, under the mulatto Rigaud, and a negro 
named Toussaint L’Ouverture,”*° they soon after quitted the colony, consign- 
ing immense wealth both to America and France, leaving General Laveaux 
in the character of commander in chief; and returned to France, where they 


CHAPTER III 121 


received from the government presiding at that time a sanction of their pro- 
ceedings. Polverel soon after died, the victim of a life of dissipation, but Son- 
thonax lived to pay the colony a triumphal visit. 

Much controversy has existed on the idea of some private arrangement 
having taken place between them and the commodore, with whom several 
flags of truce passed during the three days in which the detachment from the 
army was kept inactive. How this was, has never been explained, but from 
the situation of the road from Port-au-Prince to Jacmel, it is clear, that their 
retreat might have been interrupted, and, according to some, the fate of the 
colony determined. Immediately after Port-au-Prince came into the posses- 
sion of the British, more than three thousand armed inhabitants assembled in 
the town, ready to undertake any enterprize for the further reduction of the 
colony. Unfortunately, no use was made of the present advantages, but what 
they afforded in profit; thus an opportunity was lost, which, as is often the 
case, never occurred again. 

The capture of Port-au-Prince, so much desired, seems to have formed the 
height of British power in St. Domingo. “From that period the affairs of its 
possessions,” says an old English officer employed on the spot,” “began to 
decline in proportion, as it were, to the vast accumulation of expence; and 
all was languor, disease, or peculation!”** As soon as the general satisfac- 
tion gave way to the necessary considerations for defence, the soldiery were 
compelled to assist in raising intrenchments on the side of the town next the 
mountains by day, and to perform military duty at night, thereby suffering 
the effects, alternately, of the sun and the dew. Many of these men had been 
six months on ship-board, and the season was unfavorable to them. At this 
unfortunate juncture, arrived the Experiment frigate, with the remainder of 
the troops ordered from the Windward Islands, under the command of the 
Honourable Lieutenant-Colonel Lennox,t consisting of eight flank compa- 
nies belonging to the 22d, 23d, 25th, and 41st regiments. Now commenced in 
St. Domingo the ravages of that contagion, which, with a power more terrible 
than ordinary death itself, has bereft so many families of their hopes, and cut 
off the flower of a promising army, without the gratification of an honorable 
conflict.?42 


It has been a melancholy object of dispute, whether or not the yellow fever 


*Colonel Chambers, inspector-general of colonial troops in St. Domingo. “Remarks,” 
p. 41. 

TNow General Lennox. [Charles Lennox, fourth Duke of Richmond and fourth Duke of 
Lennox (1764-1819) was an army officer who later became an mp and lord lieutenant of 
Ireland. He and his wife hosted the famous ball the night before Quatre Bras, and he was 
present at Waterloo. ] 


122 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


had been generated, or even made its appearance in St. Domingo, previous 
to the arrival of the Experiment at Port-au-Prince. That sickness, and per- 
haps fevers incidental to all the colonies, had before been experienced by our 
troops, is certain, none of whom had gone directly from Europe, and might 
have been expected to be accustomed to the climate; yet it is to be remem- 
bered, that many of them had occasionally been kept long in the transports, 
that they had been sometimes posted on the burning sands of the Mole, and 
at others seated in marshes, which the colonists themselves could not long 
endure; and what was little better than either of these, they had opportuni- 
ties of indulgence, which required more prudence to withstand, than could 
be expected from soldiers under their circumstances. They had been already 
harassed by new modes of warfare with the blacks, who, particularly those 
under Toussaint, a negro general of uncommon ability in the interior, had 
been trained with singular care. From the sickness arising from the former 
causes, the colonial troops were entirely free, in consequence of their differ- 
ent habits. 

This pestilence is described as having been brought first to Grenada by the 
Hankey, from Bulam in Africa, where she had staid so long, crowded with 
passengers who could not be accommodated on shore for some time, as to 
contract a disease sui generis, similar to the jail distemper. The greater part 
died, and two only of the ship’s company arrived at Grenada.**? The circum- 
stances that follow, are scarcely to be conceived by those who do not know 
the numerous instances that occur, to prove the necessity of an establishment 
of a Board of Health in all the British colonies. The clothes and bedding of the 
deceased victims, were sold by auction, distributed among a variety of persons, 
and the contagion with which they were infected, consequently spread, not 
only throughout that island, but the other Antilles, and a considerable part 
of the continent. 

It is unnecessary to enter into a description of this distressing malady in a 
medical view, as sufficient accounts of its nature and treatment may be found 
in the works of several medical writers of the present day.***— Forty officers, 
and six hundred rank and file, fell victims to the fever within two months 
after the surrender of Port-au-Prince. 

It is impossible for the best of generals to distinguish, and to avail them- 
selves of every opportunity; but it is unfortunate, that so many troops should 
have been suffered to collect in the capital, thus increasing the means of dis- 
ease, when they might have served with utility elsewhere. The same omission 
can now be perceived on the part of the navy, which suffered the southern 
coast to be open to communication with Curaçoa*# and the continent, from 
whence supplies of stores of all kinds were constantly received by the enemy, 
unregarded by a single ship. With common precaution even of this kind, the 


CHAPTER III 123 


commissioners could not have escaped with the immense wealth with which 
they loaded themselves from the colony, nor could innumerable privateers 
have been equipped, which, for, a time, intercepted every vessel in our trade 
that passed through the Windward passage. 

At this period the indefatigable De Charmilly, who was the soul of the 
British enterprize at St. Domingo, was again commissioned by his drooping 
countrymen to return to Europe, for the purpose of soliciting additional aid, 
to complete the business thus far advanced. 

General Whyte resigned the command in St. Domingo, on account of ill 
health, and was succeeded by Brigadier-General Horneck,”** a man qualified 
to ensure success in a situation of difficulty. Only fifty men followed General 
Horneck from Jamaica, and no reinforcement was received to enable them 
to make any movement for several months after; he had, therefore, to remain 
on the defensive for that time, and to preserve the territory already gained, 
from the defection which was beginning to appear. 

The first success which encouraged the revolters, who were chiefly mulat- 
toes, under Rigaud, to farther exertions and attainments, was the seizure of 
Leogane, where they put to death all the French planters who fell in their 
way. This was followed in the beginning of September, by a perfidious viola- 
tion of the neutrality which had been entered into by the men of colour in the 
town of St. Marc. Lieutenant-Colonel Brisbane,“ a valuable young officer, 
who held that rank from the French legion of St. Marc, being a captain in the 
49th regiment, had been pursuing, with only eighty British in addition to the 
colonial troops under his command, the most rapid successes in the neigh- 
bourhood, and had induced a large number of the rebels to submit uncondi- 
tionally. In the pursuit of these successes, the town was left without troops, 
which afforded an irresistible temptation; they accordingly seized upon it, 
putting to death, as before, all who fell in their way. The garrison took refuge 
in a fort on the seashore, from whence they were relieved by the arrival of a 
frigate from the Mole of Cape St. Nicholas. Colonel Brisbane returned, and, 
at the expence of all the advantages he had obtained on the plain, regained 
the town, making upwards of three hundred of the insurgents prisoners. It 
had the effect, however, of inspiriting the whole of the people of colour, and 
of exciting them to greater excesses. Rigaud, who commanded in the south, 
made apparent arrangements for an attack upon the capital, by investing Fort 
Bizotton with three columns of his troops, consisting of two thousand men. 
They began their attack at 3 o'clock in the morning of the 5th of December, 
and were defeated with great slaughter. Captain Grant, who commanded, 
and Lieutenants Clunes* and Hamilton, though wounded severely in the 


*Now Lieutenant-Colonel Clunes. 


124 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


commencement of the attack, continued at their posts, and earned an honor- 
able fame, of which General Williamson bore a handsome testimony. 

Not discouraged by this repulse, Rigaud immediately prepared for a more 
formidable attack in another quarter, the recapture of Tiburon. His intentions 
were known, but, as in the escape of the commissioners, it again happened, 
that not a ship could be spared to intercept his armament, then lying off Aux 
Cayes. It sailed on the 23d of December, consisting of a brig of sixteen guns, 
and three schooners of fourteen guns each. His military force was composed 
of three thousand men, of different colours and descriptions, and the attack 
commenced on Christmas day. The garrison contained only four hundred and 
eighty men, the majority of whom were colonists, and the rest British conva- 
lescents; it held out four days, till three hundred of that number had fallen. 
The survivors, with Lieutenant Bradford of the 23d regiment, who com- 
manded under the Chevalier de Sevré, commandant of the district, fought 
their way, with astonishing bravery, for five miles through the enemy, till 
they reached Irois. An unfortunate officer, Lieutenant Baskerville, who was 
from some circumstance left behind, perished by his own hands, as is sup- 
posed, to prevent a dishonourable death, or falling into those of the enemy. 
It is unpleasing to withhold approbation from an act which evinces the most 
determined bravery, yet it is to be lamented, that he did not find some other 
means more compatible with the institutes of society, and on which history 
could dwell with more pleasure. 

Tiburon, Leogane, Jean Rabell, La Petite Rivière, and L’Artibonite, were in 
possession of the people of colour and the negroes; and the latter retaining 
the whole of the northern province, except the Mole and Fort Dauphin, were 
increasing in power and independence throughout the colony. The British 
army, on the contrary, was weakened every day, and the colonists viewed 
with anxiety and distrust, the delay which took place in the furnishing addi- 
tional forces. They required them in a body capable of some grand operation, 
which might complete the conquest of the colony, and suppress the designs 
of the people of colour; a hope which nothing but the lingering fondness 
of these unhappy proprietors for their delightful possessions, could have re- 
tained to this period. The entire power having been confided to the British 
commander, the whole of the French colonists submitted themselves to him, 
as passive agents; but, from the neglect which they experienced, owing to 
the ample employment of the British government at home, they were still 
desirous of resuming some share of authority. There will always be found 
dissatisfied persons under all circumstances, and dissolute characters ever 
ready to fall in with their designs, for the sake of the treachery itself. Thus, 
while Colonel Brisbane, who was admired for his bravery, ability, and per- 


CHAPTER III 125 


sonal qualities, was quelling the disturbance of the mulattoes, whom he had 
particularly favored, and restoring tranquillity to the whites under his protec- 
tion, a party of the latter were conspiring against his valuable life, which even 
war and disease had spared. They were, however, detected and their purpose 
defeated. But a more extensive conspiracy was soon after discovered at Port- 
au-Prince, where it was intended, by a similar party, to seize the garrison, and 
put the English to death. Twenty of the conspirators were seized, and tried by 
a council of war, composed of the principal commanders, among whom were 
five French field officers; they were found guilty, and adjudged to death. Fif- 
teen of the number were accordingly shot on the 18th of February. 

Shortly after this narrow escape, however, the amiable Colonel Brisbane 
fell, while out on a reconnoitring party. By his death the British affairs in 
St. Domingo lost one of the most able, indefatigable, and generous of their 
advocates. He acquired the affections of every one, and of those who were 
anxious to deprive him of life he was the decided friend, insomuch, that his 
constant intercourse with the mulattoes excited a degree of disapprobation 
in the whites: they, nevertheless, confided in his courage, and were never dis- 
appointed. He died universally lamented. 

The commencement of this eventful year was clouded by the death of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Markham, who, to use the language of the orders issued 
by General Horneck, “lived universally respected and beloved, and died, 
leaving a bright example of military, social, and private virtue.’*** He fell in 
the attack of an out-post, the enemy having again determined on besieging 
Fort Bizotton. Victory, however, crowned his fall, and his life was revenged 
upon six hundred of the enemy, who were slain on the spot. Their colours, 
and five pieces of cannon, were also taken. 

About the latter end of April a reinforcement arrived, consisting of the 81st 
and 96th, and a few of the 82d regiments, which, upon landing, met the fate 
of so many of their predecessors, and could not but consider their destination 
as so many graves open for their reception. 

In the month of May, 1795, when the colony had become, in the estimation 
of the British government, a splendid object of enterprize, General William- 
son, the governor of Jamaica, to whom it had been ostensibly confided, ar- 
rived at Port-au-Prince, having been appointed commander-in-chief of all the 
British possessions with the honour of the Order of the Bath.*4° 

The first exertions of the new commandant were directed to strengthen 
his position at Port-au-Prince, and to establish and strengthen a cordon from 
a village called Thomaseau, and from Grand Bois, at the extremity of the Cul 
de Sac, to Saint Marc, across a ridge of mountains, which divide the plain of 
L’Arcahaye from that of Artibonite, besides a chain of posts extending from 


126 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


thence to the Cape of Tiburon. For this purpose it became necessary to en- 
large the plan, which had already taken place, of embodying corps of negroes; 
and many slaves were purchased for the purpose from the French planters 
and others, and placed under the command of officers who had been in the 
service of the old government, or of planters most likely to ensure their utility 
by proper attention. Of these, the corps of De Source, De Pyster, De Grasse, 
La Serre, D'Alsun, and Cocherel were the most respectable; but they were, 
with many other of the arrangements that now took place, extremely expen- 
sive, and not always efficient. 

In the month of August arrived the 82d regiment, completing the quan- 
tum of the reinforcement, (a small part of which was received in April). It 
was nine hundred and eighty men strong on landing, of which number three 
hundred and fifty only remained alive in six weeks. 

With troops thus arriving in divisions, and distressed with disease, where a 
combined body was required to form a decisive power, little could be done; 
and General Williamson, already embarrassed by the most difficult circum- 
stances, was but ill prepared for those circumstances so dispiriting as the 
present; neither did his beneficence and complacency, qualities so amiable 
in private life, contribute to his assistance on the occasion. He was open to 
imposition from designing persons, and was led to countenance a system of 
expence fatal to the British interest; he was shortly succeeded in command 
by Major-General Forbes.”°° 

This spirited and active officer commenced his career by an attentive re- 
view of the different posts, and an augmentation of the forces by every means 
that presented; he strengthened the cordons already established, and secured 
the frontiers of Mirebalais and Banica, to preserve a communication with 
Spanish Saint Domingo, for procuring cattle, and other purposes. The garri- 
son of Banica, consisting, as usual, of a few British troops, colonials, and some 
Spaniards in British pay, he placed under the command of an officer of con- 
siderable merit, Sir William Cockburn,?*! who was directed to keep in view 
the free access to the plain of Cape François, which it commanded. 

Towards the close of this year, in consequence of the intrigues of a negro- 
general,”>* whose character will form a prominent feature in this history, the 
Spanish government ceded its interest in a colony, it could no longer hold, to 
the representatives of the French republic. 

In May, 1796, after a disastrous passage, about 7,000 troops, under the 
command of Brigadier-General Howe, who had sailed from Cork? near 
seven months before, arrived at the Mole of Saint Nicholas, where, as if to 
complete the destruction the elements had left unfinished, they were obliged 
to remain some weeks on board the transports. The same number of men, at 


CHAPTER III 127 


any former period, would have changed the whole affairs of the colony; but 
they were too far gone; they, with the troops already at the disposal of Gen- 
eral Forbes, (to use the language of an old experienced officer,) “were not 
such as those commanded by General Wolfe.”* Among the effects of this in- 
sufficiency may be remembered the following disastrous circumstances. 

The town of Leogane having been left in an unprotected state by the British 
troops, the republicans immediately enclosed it with a palisaded ditch,?** and 
began to strengthen the harbour, which General Forbes conceiving necessary 
to prevent, determined on attacking the enemy with a considerable force. 
Admiral Parker, after disembarking the troops, attacked the fort at the en- 
trance of the creek, but was obliged to abandon it with loss. General Forbes 
carried no artillery with him, intending, by the advice of his engineer, Major 
M‘Kerras, to take it without regular approaches. A few light pieces of can- 
non were placed to cover those who filled up the ditch, by which means the 
besiegers were to cross to the assault. The impolicy, however, of despising an 
enemy, was soon, as it is always, evinced. The besieged perceiving the con- 
temptible consideration in which they were held, from the church-tower di- 
rected a twenty-four pounder against the assailants, with such effect, as en- 
abled them to cross the ditch, and take their cannon, while they were glad in 
the opportunity afforded, by the weakness of their opponents, to re-embark 
without further injury. 

Bombarde, which had been so unsuccessfully attempted to be surprized be- 
fore, becoming particularly necessary to the garrison and fleet, at the Mole, 
for the supply of vegetables, &c. A strong body of troops were sent to attack it, 
but many of them died on the road from the difficulties of the march, under- 
taken in the middle of the day. The fort was, however, immediately surren- 
dered by capitulation; and soon after evacuated by the conquerors. 

Encouraged by these circumstances, Rigaud became confident of his 


prowess, and attacked Major-General Bowyer?* 


at Irois. He was repelled, at 
the expence of near an hundred men killed and wounded; among the latter 
of whom was the general himself. 

In short, so languid became the progress of the British arms, that the re- 
publicans commenced operations in every quarter round the capital; besides, 
compelling General Forbes to fortify the mountain called Grenier, and to 
occupy all the surrounding heights, they employed some months in the erec- 


tion of batteries, and on the fortification of two posts at St. Laurent and Le 


“Col. Chalmers’s Remarks, p. 44. [James Wolfe (1727-59) was known for developing vol- 
ley and bayonet techniques that revolutionized military training. He died during the Battle 
of Quebec and is regarded as one of the heroes of the Seven Years War. | 


128 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Boutilliere, within four miles of Port-au-Prince, without the smallest moles- 
tation from the English. 

Affairs becoming desperate, with misfortune and expence incurring daily, 
the British government determined on sending General Simcoe to endeav- 
our to recover the British character; and, if experience and skill were all that 
were wanting, little doubt could have been entertained of success. He arrived 
at St. Nicholas Mole in the beginning of March 1797, and immediately pro- 
ceeded through the British possessions to discover the evil, before the appli- 
cation of remedies with which he was well acquainted. But, alas! no ordinary 
remedies were applicable to the desperate circumstances with which he had 
to encounter; for, instructed in the science of government, and the relations 
of empires, by the inconsistency of one power, and improved in the art of war 
by the impolicy of others, the Blacks had arrived at a degree of perfection in 
both, that, notwithstanding the inveteracy of prejudice, compelled itself to 
be accredited by its effects. An acknowledgment of this fact, incontestibly 
took place the same month, in which the command of the English army was 
confided to the wisdom and activity of General Simcoe, by the appointment 
of Toussaint LOuverture, the celebrated negro officer, by the French govern- 
ment, to be general in chief of the armies in St. Domingo.”°” 

General Simcoe felt the effect of the powerful situation of his opponent, to 
whom this nomination was but an honorary sanction of the command he had 
long possessed. He commenced several economical arrangements, which, 
even if his cause was hopeless, could not fail to render it a desirable service. 
He compelled a surrender of all private leases obtained of the vacated prop- 
erty of French absentees, to the public use; and he reformed the colonial 
corps, from the number 42 to 14, placing on a temporary half-pay, the officers 
necessarily withdrawn, and rendering more eligible the situation of those, 
who were the fittest for service: yet, with any other person than General 
Simcoe, these arrangements must have been of short duration, for Toussaint 
adopted every mode to harass him, and turn the war in his own favor, by every 
stratagem that could be devised. He menaced the important frontier post of 
Mirebalais, which had been erected with stone at considerable expence: the 
commandant immediately evacuated it, and retired to Port-au-Prince, leaving 
the rich plain of the Cul de Sac open to the enemy, thereby impeding the com- 
munication of the English with Banica”** and Spanish St. Domingo. 

With somewhat of spirit, and better success, the batteries which had in- 
sulted the capital were carried; they required, however, a body of two thou- 
sand blacks, besides a reserve of British troops, and some artillery, and cost 
the life of a brave officer of colour, as he was leading the charge at St. Lau- 
rent, Major Pouchet. An attempt to cut off the retreat of Toussaint to Gonave, 
failed, from a variety of incidents. 


CHAPTER III 129 


While these operations employed the vicinity of the capital, Rigaud was 
as active in his quarter. With one thousand two hundred men he attacked 
the post at Irois, and gave the first notice of his approach, by his fire on the 
fort. The post was composed of a battalion of black troops under Colonel de 
Grasse, a company of British under Lieutenant Talbot, and twenty black artil- 
lery under M. de Brueil. Fortunately, the artillery of Rigaud was interrupted 
by Captain Rickets of the Magicienne frigate, which caused him to retire pre- 
cipitately. To increase the eclat of this repulse, another immediately followed, 
of Toussaint, from the town of St. Marc: it was a repulse, nevertheless, dearly 
bought. 

Wearied with the kind of warfare in which he was thus unavailingly en- 
gaged, General Simcoe returned to England in August, to procure a force, 
sufficient to pursue a career of glory, or to abandon a scene, furnishing at 
best but negative honors. The same causes which had before operated with 
respect to this ill-fated colony, yet continued.—The ministry of Great Brit- 
ain were employed in the complicated affairs of Europe too much, to give 
more attention to St. Domingo, and General Whyte supplied the place of 
General Simcoe,* with no additional means of success. Before the end of 
the same year, this gentleman was superseded by Major General Nesbit,?°° 
who did not live to arrive at a command of which, he would have had no 
occasion to boast.t His place was supplied by his second in command, the 
Honourable Brigadier-General Maitland,’ to whom little remained, but to 
perform the humiliations of his country, with the grace which that country 
demanded, and which no one could have better executed, in all that apper- 
tained to the gentleman. He arrived in April, 1798, at Port-au-Prince, and 
commenced strenuously an attention to circumstances, with which he was 
well acquainted, from his service under General Simcoe, by whom he had 
been appointed to several difficult commands. 

By the orders of General Nesbit, the British property in St. Domingo ceased 
to be valued at more than the annual sum of 300,000 l., which General Mait- 
land soon found inadequate to the purpose of their maintenance, as the colo- 
nial revenues had decreased to 100,000 I. The evacuation of the capital and 


“The writer cannot omit in this place paying his tribute of respect to this excellent and 
gallant officer. If all the abilities of the general, the suavity of the gentleman, and the vig- 
orous powers of a manly understanding may be expected to unite in one person, it is in 
Lieutenant-General Simcoe. When commanding the Queen’s Rangers, in the American 
war, he distinguished himself on every occasion, and in a variety of important battles 
crowned himself and his corps with the highest military glory. 

+ By the death of General Nesbit, (whose memory deserves his grateful recollection) the 
writer lost a very sincere friend in many respects, though he cannot regret the appoint- 
ment of his Brigade Major, with which he was to have been honoured by him on this ex- 
pedition. 


130 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


its dependencies, was therefore the first step that occupied his attention, and 
his arrangements were as honorable to his sensibility, as the proudest victory 
could have been to his courage. — After every consideration for their peculiar 
circumstances, he effected a truce for a month, and stipulated for the pro- 
tection in person and property of all the adherents of Great Britain. He then 
withdrew with the remainder of his force to Jeremie, which he had formerly 
commanded. 

With his concentrated force at this point, he acquiesced in the wishes of 
Admiral Parker,**! to reduce Tiburon, for the purpose of its retention, with 
the Mole, the object so much desired for the security of the Windward pas- 
sage: but the tide was now turned, the troops could not disembark for tem- 
pestuous weather, and other causes; and even the brave De Source? who 
marched across the peninsula to meet him, lingered on his way. 

The Mole at length only remained, to which General Maitland retired, for 
the purpose of his last negotiation with the triumphant black General, Tous- 
saint. The possessions of the English were here given up, as well as their 
colonial black troops, and some commercial stipulations being entered into, 
which recognized the island as a neutral power, England resigned all her pre- 
tensions to St. Domingo for ever! 

Such was the end of this disastrous enterprize, which had for five years fed 
the hopes and vanity of the British empire, to which had been latterly sacri- 
ficed many valuable lives, and an extravagant portion of the public money. 
That it was undertaken with too little consideration, must be always acknowl- 
edged: for, if the British ministry only meant, by finding employment for the 
French commissioners in St. Domingo, to prevent the seat of war from being 
carried to Jamaica, they might have effected this purpose, without entering 
upon so large a field, or sacrificing the lives and interests of a number of brave 
and unfortunate colonists; and if the conquest of the island was sincerely in- 
tended, the means furnished were contemptible, in comparison even with 
the exertions of the inhabitants. It is, however, probable, that no force which 
could have been furnished, would have been sufficient to cope with the 
power of the revolted negroes, and if the British colonies in the Antilles have 
been saved by these means, it is only to be lamented that their salvation cost 
so dear, in proportion to their advantages to the country. 

Having recounted the progress and termination of the British affairs, it is 
necessary to recur to the circumstances of those who were left in sole and 
uninterrupted power in St. Domingo. It will be recollected, that the first 
consequence of the appearance of the English, was the entire abolition of 
negro slavery by the French commissioners, who therefore recognized all 
who enlisted under their standard, as free citizens, and perfected them in 


CHAPTER III 131 


the knowledge of arms: likewise, that immediately after the first onset of 
the insurrection in the plain of the Cape, the negro, Jean François, who was 
then principal in command, had evinced a foresight which exhibited the de- 
termined intentions of his followers, in employing the time of those who 
were unoccupied, with the women and children, in the cares of agriculture, 
for their future preservation. To this general was soon added several others, 
not inferior in ability, of whom the most conspicuous were Biassou,”®? Bouk- 
man, and Toussaint; but, although the last of those who declared himself, 
the latter soon eclipsed all the others by his conduct in a regular warfare. 
While Spain yet ranked among the coalesced powers who avowed the restora- 
tion of royalty in France, the first and last of the black chiefs had arrived at 
such consideration from their acknowledged merit, as to be presented (per- 
haps as an inducement to declare on the side of royalty, to which they ap- 
peared to lean, as the enemies of the commissioners, whose invitation they 
had not accepted) with the rank of general in the Spanish army, and the an- 
cient military order of that country. 

The departure of the French commissioners in 1794, and the conclusion 
of peace between France and Spain, which ceded its territory to the repub- 
lic, a year after,* had placed Toussaint in almost absolute power: (for his 
colleague”®’ preferred retiring on his rank to Cadiz); the brave, but cruel 
Rigaud, afterwards fled from the island; and every occurrence had contrib- 
uted to his aggrandizement; till the whole was sanctioned, in 1797, by the ex- 
ecutive power of the French government in their commission as the general 
in chief of the armies, and of the whole island of St. Domingo. This conse- 
quence was now enlarged in his acknowledgment as a neutral power by the 
most important of all his enemies. 

Such was briefly the progress of Toussaint, which was marked by many cir- 
cumstances that reflected the highest credit on his character, and gave dig- 
nity to his dominion. He had throughout been the moderator of all the differ- 
ent factions in the island, and was every way fitted for its legislator, as well as 
its chief. He was, indeed, one of those characters who invite the principle of 
an elective monarchy, but which are too rarely found to advise its universal 
adoption. His character will be more fully given in the ensuing part of this 
work; it is at present sufficient to say, that, although he detested the conduct 
of the French commissioners, he protected their office from indignity, and 
shielded them from vengeance; he relieved the planters from the intolerable 
tyranny of the commissioners; he saved the French army from punishment 
too often not greater than their guilt; and would not permit the increased 
cruelty of retaliation on the British forces, for the conduct of allies, which 
even the colonists regretted to adopt. He saved the life of General Laveaux, 


132 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


who acknowledged the fact with gratitude; and his intercourse with general 
Maitland was of the noblest kind. Notwithstanding these exertions, in which 
he had to combat with the natural prejudices of many of his followers, he 
preserved their confidence in his integrity, and their obedience to his wishes, 
and was hailed, with great justice, by common consent, as the perfector of the 
independence of St. Domingo.?® 


CHAP. IV. 
State of Manners on the Establishment of Independence, &c. in St. Domingo, 
with a Memoir of the Circumstances of the Author’s Visit to the Island. 


THE white population of St. Domingo, now still farther decreased by the emi- 
grations which followed the evacuation of the English, presented but a dis- 
mal semblance of the flourishing French colony; added to which, many of 
the whites who were encouraged to remain, now spread through the eastern 
districts with a spirit of wild speculation, and became more solitary, when 
they might have been expected to associate with stronger ties than ever. Of 
the Spaniards, widely scattered, in their most tranquil state, many had emi- 
grated, but more had been sent from the island, on the surrender of the Span- 
ish territory to Toussaint. Although the defection of the whites was striking 
in the towns where they had been most numerous, that of the blacks was 
increased in a proportion so large, as to astonish those who had witnessed 
their losses, and the decrease which was remarked after the first insurrec- 
tions of the negroes. This is accounted for in a satisfactory manner, by the 
greater degree of comforts experienced by the females, and the decrease of 
general labor.” Although, for some time, the change of government appeared 
to tinge with a melancholy hue, the parts of the island formerly in the pos- 
session of the English, yet the rude happiness of those who had now become 
its possessors, soon suppressed every other effect; and, notwithstanding the 
despotic rule of martial law, circumstances in general began to wear a prom- 
ising appearance. 

At this period the narrator of their history became possessed of an opportu- 


*Malouet, Mémoires sur les Colonies. [Pierre Victor, Baron Malouet (1740-1814), Col- 
lection de mémoires et correspondences officielles sur administration des colonies (1802). A 
former planter, Malouet eventually became Minister of the Navy under Louis XVIII. He 
played an important part in the kingdom’s unsuccessful schemes to recover the island for 
France. | 


CHAPTER IV 133 


nity of judging of the state and power of the people, who form the subject of 
his present disquisition; and his personal observations during his detention 
among them, will supply the information submitted in the present chapter.”©° 

A violent hurricane having dismasted the little bark,” in which he was pro- 
ceeding from Jamaica to join his regiment at Martinique, (having been be- 
fore accommodated in the cabin of his friend, Admiral Smith, as far as the 
Mole St. Nicholas,) it was driven under the walls of Cape Francois, and in that 


state compelled to wait the relief of the brigands,?7° 


an appellation which the 
superior policy that already appeared in this extraordinary republic, had not 
yet obliterated from its members. To avoid the suspicion in which, notwith- 
standing the recent treaty, the English yet continued to be viewed, and to 
prevent the probability of injury to his companions, the writer was induced 
to assume the character of an American, which was easy to be effected, as the 
vessel was ultimately bound to that continent. The crew were permitted to 
land after certain ceremonies, and the first object which excited their atten- 
tion, was no less than the hero of this novel empire. Toussaint was conversing 
with two privates of his forces on the batteries, and when he saw the Euro- 
peans approaching, immediately walked towards them, and, addressing them 
in French, inquired the news, from whence they came, and their destination. 
One served as respondent for the whole, who spoke in such terms as his char- 
acter demanded, and the General civilly took his leave. 

The number of Americans at this port could not fail to attract particular 
notice, and every attention seemed to be paid to the accommodation of their 
commerce, and a striking degree of interest in every occurrence that con- 
cerned them. Even the women seemed to renew a fondness long repressed 
for the whites, in favor of the meanest of the American sailors. The present 
writer, however, requiring some rest after his recent voyage, hastened, on re- 
ceiving his directions to the purpose, to the Hotel de la Republique, the prin- 
cipal house, usually resorted to by Americans, an edifice of rather elegant ap- 
pearance; and on his way, except the preponderancy of the black complexion, 
perceived but little difference from an European city. On entering the house, 
however, he immediately perceived that the usual subordinations of society 
were entirely disregarded, and that he was to witness, for the first time, a real 
system of equality. 

Here were officers and privates, the colonel and the drummer, at the same 
table indiscriminately; and the writer had been scarcely seated at a repast 


*The Maria, Danish schooner, commanded by James Frazer. 
TThe liberal reception which the military always met with on board the Hannibal is too 
well known to require any compliment on the present occasion. 


134 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


in the first room to which he was conducted, when a fat negro, to initiate 
him in the general system, helped himself frequently from his dish, and took 
occasion to season his character by large draughts of the wine, accompanied 
with the address of “Mon Americain” The appearance of the house, and its 
accommodations, were not much inferior to a London coffee-house, and on 
particular occasions exhibited a superior degree of elegance. Toussaint not 
unfrequently dined here himself, but he did not sit at the head of the table, 
from the idea, (as was asserted,) that the hours of refection and relaxation 
should not be damped by the affected forms of the old regimen, and that no 
man should assume a real superiority in any other place than the field. He was 
in the evenings at the billiard-table, where the writer conversed and played 
with him several times; and he could not help, on some occasions, when a 
want of etiquette disturbed him for a moment, congratulating himself, that if 
he experienced not the refinement of European intercourse, he saw no room 
for insincerity: and that if delicate converse did not always present itself, he 
was free from the affectation of sentiment. 

In traversing the once superb city of the Cape, though presenting a toler- 
able appearance from the shore, desolation every where presented itself. On 
the site where elegant luxury had exhausted its powers to delight the voluptu- 
ary, all was magnificent ruin! and to mark the contrast stronger, of the wrecks 
were composed temporary houses for the American merchants, and petty 
shops inhabited by the natives. Several spacious streets towards the centre, 
displayed the walls of superb edifices of five and six stories, with gilded bal- 
conies, of which the beautiful structure exhibited the devastation that had oc- 
curred, with additional horror. Nor was this all, for in different parts of these 
ruins the sad remains of the former possessors were visibly mingled with the 
crumbling walls: 


“There — heedless of the dead, 
The shelter-seeking peasant rears his shed, 


And wonders man could want the larger pile”? 


Having been informed of a review which was to take place on the plain of 
the Cape, the writer availed himself of the opportunity, accompanied by some 
Americans, and a few of his own countrymen who resided there under that 
denomination. Of the grandeur of the scene he had not the smallest concep- 
tion. Two thousand officers were in the field, carrying arms, from the general 
to the ensign, yet with the utmost attention to rank; without the smallest 
symptom of the insubordination that existed in the leisure of the hotel. Each 


272 


general officer had a demi-brigade,?”* which went through the manual exer- 


cise with a degree of expertness seldom witnessed, and performed equally 


CHAPTER IV 135 


well several manoeuvres applicable to their method of fighting. At a whistle 
a whole brigade ran three or four hundred yards, then separating, threw 
themselves flat on the ground, changing to their backs or sides, keeping up 
a strong fire the whole of the time, till they were recalled; they then formed 
again, in an instant, into their wonted regularity. This single manoeuvre was 
executed with such facility and precision, as totally to prevent cavalry from 
charging them in bushy and hilly countries. Such complete subordination, 
such promptitude and dexterity, prevailed the whole time, as would have 
astonished any European soldier who had the smallest idea of their previous 
situation. 

The pleasing sensations inspired by the ability manifested in this review, 
were checked by the additional monuments of human ferocity which pre- 
sented themselves on his return to the city; the conflagration of which, and 
of the surrounding plantations, was still in the memory of several Americans, 
who described the effect, as awfully grand beyond conception. 

In one of the squares in the north-west quarter was placed an edifice that 
made some amends for the desolation appearing in its vicinity, from the ele- 
gance of its execution. It was an ascent to a canopy, or dome, of which the 
architecture was not perfectly regular, beneath which were two seats, and 
above them an inscription, that eminently exhibited the tolerance of Tous- 
saint. There were two sentinels to guard it, who, being asked if any one might 
ascend the steps, answered in the affirmative, but with a strict prohibition 
against touching the cap of liberty, which crowned it. It was a tribute of re- 
spect to the memory of Sonthonax and Polverel, the French commissioners, 
and had been erected by some of their advocates at a time when their lar- 
gesses obtained for them what they would not otherwise have enjoyed, a 
transitory popularity. An extract from a speech of one of them formed part 
of the inscription, in French, and which countenanced the opinion, that the 
abolition of slavery was a primary object of their mission. It was to the follow- 


ing effect: 
My Friends, 
We came to make you free. 
Frenchmen give Liberty to the World. 
You are free. 
Guard your Freedom. 
Vive la Liberté. Vive la Republique. 


Vive Robespierre.?” 


The remainder of the inscription consisted of a selection from the procla- 
mation for abolishing slavery. The prevailing opinion of these men, notwith- 


K shr mpl ‘ ff A the PAPE SE de cop notes Dede He GA spprotstsftatler 
/ d / 


View of a Temple erected by the Blacks to commemorate their Emancipation. 
Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, Special 
Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


CHAPTER IV 137 


standing they had been execrated for their conduct, was favorable to their 
talents, and to their spirit. 

Though impressed with the necessity of caution, it would have required 
much more sang-froid than was possessed by the observer, to resist the nu- 
merous impulses of mingling with a people whose conduct presented the 
most generous hospitality, and objects of the most interesting contemplation. 
He obtained access to the houses of most whose intercourse could furnish 
either information or pleasure; nor did he reject the negro hut at other times, 
though certainly of less attraction. 

As in all states of human society, particularly in the vortex of a revolution, 
which effected so complete a change, the able and the cunning had elevated 
themselves above those who were of the same rank of life. Negroes, recol- 
lected in the lowest state of slavery, including Africans, filled situations of 
trust and responsibility; they were, likewise, in many instances, occupied by 
those who had been in superior circumstances under the old regimen, free 
negroes, and mulattoes. 

The superior order had attained a sumptuousness of life, with all the en- 
joyments which dignity could obtain, or rank confer.—The interior of their 
houses was, in many instances, furnished with a luxe beyond that of the most 
voluptuous European, while no want of trans-atlantic elegance appeared; nor, 
amidst a general fondness for shew, was the chasteness of true taste always 
neglected. Their etiquette extended to a degree of refinement scarcely to be 
conceived; and the service of their domestics, among whom were, from what 
cause was not ascertained, some mulattoes, was performed with more celerity 
than in many instances in Europe. A conscious ease, and certain gaieté du 
coeur, presided over every repast. Conversation had free scope, except as re- 
lated to their own former circumstances, but when the defence of their coun- 
try was the subject, every eye filled with fire, and every tongue shouted— 
Victory! The names of some, who had seceded from the black army were, the 
only objects that seemed to excite detestation. In many instances the writer 
has heard reasoning, and witnessed manners of acuteness and elegance, the 
relation of which would appear incredible, from those who were remembered 
in a state of servitude, or whose parents were in situations of abject penury; 
while sallies of wit, not frequently surpassed, have enlivened many an hour. 
It would ill become him, notwithstanding the tide of prejudice, which has 
always pervaded his assertions, to suppose his readers capable of gratification 
from the chit-chat of a St. Domingo table; and it would be equally unjust to 
employ the opportunities afforded him by unguarded kindness, in the accu- 
mulation of fleeting anecdotes, arising from domestic privacy; he therefore 
contents himself with stating, that the enjoyments of life were to be found in 


138 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


a high degree in the capital of St. Domingo, and that their alloy did not ex- 
ceed, nor perhaps always equal, that of ancient European cities. 

The men were in general sensible and polite, often dignified and impres- 
sive; the women frequently elegant and engaging. The intercourse of the sexes 
was on the most rational footing, and the different degrees of colour which 
remained, had lost most of that natural hostility which formerly existed. Sev- 
eral Americans had intermarried with ladies of colour very advantageously, 
and to appearance happily. They were, generally, very agreeable women, and 
felt no inequality in their difference of complexion or nation. Like Sappho, 
they could plead, (in many instances, in point of wit, sprightliness, and 
pathos, little inferior to the Lesbian muse, though without her powers of 
song) 


“Brown though I am, an Ethiopian dame 
Inspir'd young Perseus with a generous flame; 
Turtles and doves of different hues unite, 
And glossy black is pair’d with shining white.”?” 

The drama, that source of rational delight, always so prevalent in St. 
Domingo, existed, in more strength and propriety than it had done before; 
and that licentiousness which appears inseparable to it in a higher state, was 
actually restrained. The representations were chiefly comedies en vaudeville, 
and a sort of pantomime;—sometimes serious representations, allusive to 
local circumstances, and sometimes merely humourous burlesques. —The 
conduct of the whole was highly creditable to the talents of the performers, 
some of whom yet remained from the French school, who, although driven 
to seek a livelihood under such doubtful auspices, might have shone with 
equal lustre to their more fortunate contemporaries on an European stage. 
The black performers, who preponderated in number, were not behind in 
talents; the writer saw a play of Moliere’s performed with an accuracy that 
would not have disgraced the first theatre in Europe?” — Even painting, from 
some recent specimens, appeared to be encouraged, and cultivated as an ac- 
complishment, in a slight degree. A young lady of colour, of the name of 
La Roche, presented a large company, of which the writer was one, in the 
course of a few minutes, with their likenesses, very accurately cut in pro- 
file. — Music, also, though it must be confessed, not such as to vie with the 
harmony of the spheres, was every where prevalent to an excess, and the 
practice of most kinds in use, though stringed instruments were preferred. — 
Yet, with an ardent sensibility that appeared in many instances, and which 
could not fail to be cultivated under present circumstances, the rich blacks 
suffered the greater part of the capital to lie in ruins; they appeared to shrink 


CHAPTER IV 139 


from reinstating it, as if in rebuilding their former residences, they should 
create new masters. 

The situation of those who still remained in humble privacy, and who 
formed the great bulk of the people, was indeed very greatly changed. Their 
condition, agreeably to their capacities ofenjoyment, approached nearer hap- 
piness than many others which are considered its ultimatum. Crimes were by 
no means frequent, and those rather attributable to accident than vice. They 
were perfectly at liberty as regarded themselves, and were more ready to per- 
form their social duties, than the state was urgent in requiring them. Those 
qualities conspicuous in the negroes under their worst circumstances, their 
regard for all the relations of life, and tendernesses to each other, seemed ex- 
panded with their freedom, and many of the little prejudices that had existed 
wore away. Those amusements, which were formerly suppressed, had now 
free scope, but they restrained themselves from public annoyance with more 
regularity than could have been effected by the strictest police. 

The menage of the labourer in the town and its vicinity, was improved in a 
proportion equal to his condition. A rough, yet neat couch, supplied the place 
of the wretched bedding of a former period, and the visitor was not unpro- 
vided for, though it is lamentable to state, that in several instances the fur- 
niture of the cottage was beholden to the public commotions, and in one in- 
stance, painfully risible, a beautiful fire-screen, the dextrous workmanship of 
some fair sufferer, concealed a dog then roasting from some of their fellows, 
who considered it opprobrious to be mangeurs des chiens.” 

In one instance, the writer was introduced by a brigand' of peculiar intel- 
ligence, (with whom he had frequent conferences on the military tactics of 
the black army) to the cottage of a black laborer, of whom an account may not 
be uninteresting. He had a family of thirteen children; eight of them by one 
woman, and the remainder by two others; the former only lived with him in 
the same cottage, with his mother, who was aged and infirm; the other two, 
separately, at a small distance. This man was an epitome of legislature, and his 
family a well regulated kingdom in miniature. His cottage consisted of three 
irregular apartments, the first of which was his refectory, where, as often as 


*Let it not excite wonder that the blacks, deriving their origin from some peculiar parts 
of Africa, are remarkably fond of the flesh of this animal, (of which an account may be seen 
at large, I believe, in Du Tertre,) for it has been often found an excellent substitute for other 
food at sea, and has been used with success by convalescents. See Cook’s Voyages. I quote 
the incident from memory. [James Cook (1728-79), A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (1784). ] 

ŸIn the recollection of my stay at Cape François, I use the term negro and brigand, (both 
derogatory of the ruling power of St. Domingo,) not as by any means appropriate to the 
people they describe at present, but as the means of distinguishing them to the European, 
who cannot so easily assimilate himself with their present condition. 


140 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


possible, and always on jours de fêtes, his subjects assembled, including on 
those occasions his three wives. The furniture of this apartment was entirely 
of his own making, even to the smallest utensil, and with an ingenuity be- 
yond what might be expected from perfect leisure; notwithstanding the arti- 
ficer, during the process, had been obliged to attend his labor in the fields, 
and was a considerable time in arms. On a neat shelf, appropriated peculiarly 
to their use, lay a mass book, and a mutilated volume of Volney’s Travels,?”® 
some parts of which he understood more than his visitor. Every thing conve- 
nience required was to be found on a small scale, and the whole so compact, 
and clean, with such an air of properté throughout as was absolutely attrac- 
tive. His own bed-room was furnished with an improved bedstead, supported 
by trussels, with a mattress and bedding of equal quality with the other fur- 
niture, but that of his children and mother surpassed the whole. One bed- 
stead contained them, yet separated the male from the female, the young 
from the aged, and was separated or combined in an instant.*—The third 
was his kitchen and store-house, and might also be called his laboratory, for 
conveniences were found for chemical experiments, though not of the most 
scientific kind; but every utensil for culinary purposes were provided in the 
best manner. The wife of this laborer (for he had submitted to the ceremony 
of marriage with the female who had borne him the most children, as is the 
general custom with them) was nearly as ingenious as himself, and equally 
intelligent. The mode he pursued in the regulation of his domestic economy 
was excellent; as continence is not a virtue of the blacks, the increase of his 
family was not confined to his own house; yet, even in his amours he was 
just; and as the two mothers before-mentioned were less protected than his 
ostensible wife, the primary object of his consideration was to have the whole 
of his children under his own care. This was reconciled to all parties from the 
first, in so mild a way, that no distinction was perceivable but in age, while the 
mothers held a relationship to their domiciliated offspring similar to that of 
an aunt or cousin, each exerting herself for the purpose of adding to the com- 
forts of her own child.— On festive occasions, the two mothers sat alternately 
on the right or left of the mistress of the house, with as much etiquette as 
might be perceived in a more elevated station, and with the utmost harmony. 
The master of the family was absolute, but with him it was in theory, not in 
practice, for all seemed to vie in forbearance. As soon as the children could 
contribute their little powers to labor, they were employed; the younger (ex- 
cept as regarded their strength) being subject to the inferior offices; and, sin- 


“Tt is a matter of regret to the author, that the plan of this singular bedstead, which 
might have been adapted to the European cottage with many advantages, was lost. 


CHAPTER IV 141 


gular as it may appear, on the festive occasions alluded to, they waited upon 
their seniors, though but by a few years, and seemed delighted in the office. 
Agreeable to this rule, in accordance with that reverence for age so remark- 
able among blacks of every condition, the grandmother received the affection 
and attention of all; and though often crabbed, infirm, and discontented, no 
one seemed to consider her failings as such, but as a duty prescribed them to 
bear. 

In fact, the writer considered this numerous family, as he beheld them at 
their frugal meal a model for domestic life, with a proof that those jarring 
interests, which, in the smallest connection, as well as in the largest states, 
creating more embarrassment than the most adverse circumstances, or the 
greatest crimes, may be avoided by a generous conduct, and reciprocal kind- 
ness. He need scarcely add, happy was his humble friend, or that each indi- 
vidual of his family, in their separate capacities, laid up a store of happiness 
for themselves, and those around them. 

From what could be perceived (quitting the confines of the town,) the pro- 
ductive system of the earth seemed to be founded on original principles. — 
Every individual employed a portion of his time in labour, and received an 
allotted part of the produce for his reward, while all took the field, from a 
sense of duty to themselves. A perfect combination appeared in their con- 
duct, and every action came directly from the heart. More than sixty thou- 
sand men were frequently exercised together on the plain of the Cape, in 
excellent discipline, whose united determination against an invading enemy, 
would be victory or death. Little coercion was necessary, and punishment was 
chiefly inflicted by a sense of shame produced by slight confinement, or the 
like. Labour was so much abridged, that no want of leisure was felt; it would 
be a great gratification to the feeling heart, to see the peasant in other coun- 
tries with a regulated toil similar to that of the labourer in St. Domingo. 

Such is a general sketch of the state of society, as it appeared in the capital 
of St. Domingo, which spread internally as far as its effects could be expected 
to reach. —There was no possibility of acquiring correct accounts of the plans 
of government, which had been submitted to Toussaint, much less of the 
forms he was disposed to adopt. A regular municipal establishment existed, 
and martial government, dispensed every where in all its vigour, rendered 
civil jurisdiction of little avail. 

The writer observed, with pleasure, the delay in repairing the vessel, which 
afforded him an opportunity of examining objects which might never return. 
For several weeks he continued to amuse himself with observations on the 
manners of the people, which he had no idea at that time of preserving be- 
yond the information and amusement of his own friends, and by sketching 


142 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


draughts of the principal posts that were accessible. He enjoyed the habits of 
a metropolis, and, except the anxiety which would obtrude on account of the 
delay from his duty, participated in the general happiness. 

When the time arrived for the departure of the vessel, at an unexpected 
moment; such is the human heart, he lingered on a spot which he would have 
before avoided at the hazard of his life. The ship had been repaired— all was 
ready — and bidding farewel to new connections which had just began to en- 
gage him, he returned on board with the agreeable hopes of a speedy arrival 
at St. Thomas’s:?77 but — 


“Heaven from all creatures hides the book of fate!”278 


After beating about upon the coast for three days, in the most perilous cir- 
cumstances, the unfortunate vessel sprung a leak, when they were compelled 
to put into Fort Dauphin, or, according to the revolutionary nomenclature, 
Fort Egalité. 

In this situation the master of the vessel and the writer apprehended no 
danger or impropriety in going on shore. Hoisting therefore Danish colours, 
they came to anchor under a small fort, when in less than half an hour the 
latter was arrested after landing by four blacks, and a mulatto officer of great 
ferocity. They returned with him on board, and placed him under the care of 
two black sentinels. These informed him, in answer to his anxious inquiries, 
that he was suspected of being a spy, that he would be tried on the morrow, 
and of course be condemned. Such was the complacent idea attached to the 
trial of a stranger, who was afterwards to defend the character of their chief. 

Apprehensions of different kinds now crowded his imagination: he did not 
know whether suspicions might not have occurred at Cape François; and 
the commandant of the district have been prepared for his arrival. He was 
aware, that, in a few instances, he had ventured farther than he should have 
done. He had also been allowed access to many of the principal people, and 
he knew not what might have taken place after his departure. He was, how- 
ever, left unmolested, and, except his freedom, without any other depriva- 
tion; a circumstance of the most fortunate kind, as it afforded him an oppor- 
tunity of destroying his baggage and papers, including a variety of documents, 
which must have been dangerous in the highest degree.” These he disposed 
of, by putting them out of the cabin-window in the middle of the night, with 


*Besides his military appointments, they included correct views of Fort Picolet and 
other works, and several plans, which he hoped to have had the honour of presenting 
to the Duke of York; his Royal Highness having condescended to regard, with attention, 
other attempts which he had the honour of presenting to him. [Rainsford addressed a 
Memorial to the Duke of York in 1795 before leaving for the West Indies, but its contents 
remain a mystery. | 


CHAPTER IV 143 


a weight attached sufficient to sink them. Having succeeded in this affair, and 
the proceedings of the ensuing day continuing to occupy his attention, his 
situation became most unpleasant. The silence of the night, interrupted by 
the murmurs of the ocean, the clamours of the guard, and the distant sounds 
from the shore, produced the strongest melancholy; while confused surmises 
of the determination of the morrow, and a contemplation of the shame, rather 
than the terror of an ignominious death, revolving in his mind, deprived him 
of the possibility of rest, and totally unfitted him for the slightest preparation. 

Early in the morning he was taken on shore, and examined by a black gen- 
eral, named Muro,?”? the commanding officer of the district. He could not 
help thinking that his appearance augured well, for he bore the principal 
mythological characteristic of Justice. He was totally blind of one eye, and ap- 
peared to see but little through the other. He, however, relieved the prisoner 
from the apprehension of any charge existing previous to the moment; for 
he began his examination by insisting, that he was not an American, but an 
English spy, reconnoitering the coast; and closed it by acquainting him, that 
a court-martial, already summoned, would assemble on the morrow, and his 
trial would be prompt and decisive. He was then conducted to a dark prison, 
(which wanted none of the usual concomitants of such a place,) and treated 
with the utmost indignity. There was no bed; nor had he any other provi- 
sion than some coarse, dry fish, which he could not eat—a treatment he was 
afterwards informed was used to prisoners during the space between appre- 
hension and trial, to prevent any opportunity for the contrivance of evasion. 
At the hour of ten he was brought before a regular military court, composed 
of twelve black general officers, the etiquette of which astonished him. Gen- 
eral Christophe,”*° a relative of Toussaint, being in a neighbouring district, 
presided, and Muro sat on his right-hand. They interrogated him with the ut- 
most discrimination and acuteness, appearing perfectly conversant with the 
nature of the business. But, for the commandant already named, not a look 
nor an attitude escaped him—and he darted his eye, in which both seemed 
to have centered an uncommon degree of fire, over every part of the prisoner, 
the form of whose very head-dress, he insisted, was not en Americain! 

He was put on his defence in equal form, but all he could urge had not the 
smallest effect, as he had no passports nor any American papers to exhibit. 
Notwithstanding every appearance to the contrary, they had had some deci- 
sive testimony of imprudent liberty on the island; and, after several hours de- 
liberation, he was condemned to suffer death as quick as possible. The master 
of the vessel behaved with dignity of character, and the utmost solicitude. He 
protested against the judgment, but without effect; and the prisoner was re- 
manded till the sentence should be transmitted to the General-en-Chef?*" 
for his approval. 


+ ru he LT AN Hartil ihiihi de NA the d Gather le CS) rath 


/ j ) 
f f f 
epre Diti lhtee 7/2 Ty, Te Ay, 


The Court Martial which sentenced the Author to Death: General Christophe 
President. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, 
Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


CHAPTER IV 145 


He was then remanded to a different kind of prison, which, though little 
superior in point of accommodation, had the advantage of air, and the com- 
munication of the human species, though only by stealth. It was the remains 
of a dilapidated building, the part of which appropriated to the prisoner, was 
secured with strong iron-bars, in a fashion then very prevalent: he had also 
the incumbrance of a chain from the right arm to the left foot. For fourteen 
days he lay in the agony of suspense between life and death, with every eve- 
ning the cruel intimation, that he would certainly be hanged on the next 
morning. 

Even in this situation he could not resist the opportunity which his prison, 
or rather cage, afforded him, of observing the surrounding scene, which was 
more delightful than even fancy could picture. It was situated in the midst ofa 
rich valley, through which a stream from the neighbouring hill meandered in 
romantic form. A church was nearly hid in the vale, and the rising ground was 
fortified in every direction. Over the whole the most exquisite foliage exhib- 
ited its charming fruits, with all the richness of a tropic region. Beneath the 
spreading cocoa, and the taller yam, he was nightly amused with the cheerful 
dance, the negroes assembling when they quitted labour, without any seem- 
ing appointment, but as a natural habit; sometimes they had, on jours de fétes, 
or holidays, a particular entertainment of activity, the principal part of which 
was the Calenda, or “dance of love.” On these occasions they were dressed 
with peculiar care: those who had been recently employed in arms retaining 
some part of their uniform, and the females bedecked with various jewels: 
they had also a refection. The animation displayed by both sexes in the dance 
was astonishing, which consisting entirely of amatory history, was equal to 
many ballets which are performed on the French or Italian stage, while the 
dancers might have been called, without any dereliction from the Cytherean 
goddess’? though not exactly comporting with her in complexion, 


“fair Venus’ train.” 254 


The hauteur with which they passed the prison of “the white man taken” 
was astonishing; yet some seemed willing to pity and relieve, but it arose 
rather from ostentation than mercy. One circumstance, however, occurred 
that remains deeply impressed in his bosom, and relieves his mind while 
recording it, which would have done honor to the most dignified of a differ- 
ent complexion. 

After lying two nights on a couch, formed of dried sugar-canes, with a very 
slender supply of food, the prisoner had resigned himself to the vacuity of 
despair; he was stretched out in silent agony, when, as the night closed in, 
and the mirthful troops had progressively retired, a gentle female voice, with 


146 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the tenderest accents, aroused his attention. How long the benign object had 
been there, he could not ascertain; but, when he looked up, and beheld her, 
his feelings were indescribable: she was a fine figure, rather tall, and slender, 
with a face most beautiful, and a form of the finest symmetry, improved by 
the melancholy air which the scene had given her. 

She was dressed in a superior style, and possessed all the elegance of Euro- 
pean manners, improved by the most expressive carriage. She held a basket, 
containing the most delicate food, with the finest fruits: she entreated him to 
receive them silently, and to destroy any remnants, as a discovery would be 
fatal to her, and prejudicial to himself. He was about to reply with the ardour 
of gratitude, when, in an instant, she was gone! On the following evening, she 
returned, and endeavoured to comfort him with the most obliging expres- 
sions; and, by evincing extreme anxiety on his behalf, once more light up the 
illusion of hope in his breast, which he had abandoned, with all human pros- 
pects, for ever. The next evening she repeated her visit, and condescended 
to favor him with more extensive communication. Still not a word occurred 
to disclose her name, or situation: once, indeed, she made some distant allu- 
sions to the English, which led him to imagine, she had been impressed with 
gratitude towards the country by some obligation. Whatever her name, or 
whatever her circumstances, if this slight memorial should live to reach that 
delightful isle, in which, as an angelic representation of mercy, she may yet 
stay the hand of the destroyer, it will bear to her the sincere effusions of a 
grateful heart, which, though bruised by those of a fairer skin, can never dis- 
charge its sense of duty." 

The faithful commander of the vessel, from whose mishap this dreadful 


*I have ever conceived this adventure as highly illustrative of the character of the sex 
conveyed in the eulogium of Lediard, which contains sentiments I have always delighted 
to repeat.—“I have,” says he, “always remarked, that women, in all countries, are civil, 
obliging, tender, and humane; that they are ever inclined to be gay and cheerful, timo- 
rous and modest; and, that they do not hesitate, like men, to perform a kind, or generous 
action. Not haughty nor arrogant, not supercilious, they are full of courtesy, and fond of 
society—more liable in general to err than man, but in general, also, more virtuous, and 
performing more good actions than he. To a woman, whether civilized or savage, I never 
addressed myself in the language of decency and friendship, without receiving a decent 
and friendly answer. With man it has often been otherwise.” 

With many opportunities of judging in various countries, and in various situations, I 
warmly subscribe to this just encomium. [John Ledyard (1751-89) was a famed American 
traveler, author of A Journal of Captain Cook’s Last Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (1783). The 
“Eulogium” was part of personal papers first published posthumously in Proceedings of the 
Association for Promoting the Discovery of the Interior Parts of Africa, 1788-1790 (1791), 65-67. 
It became very popular and was often quoted and republished in a variety of journals and 
newspapers. | 


rw 


7 / 4 / 
ee + Luther when under derlenme 1 ‘2 I, wh sl sr ty 
/ > / / | 
4 benere hent , Lente 7 Ge CMS 


The Author when under sentence of Death relieved by a benevolent Female 
of Colour. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, 
Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


148 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


circumstance arose, never long quitted the spot, and frequently ventured to 
whisper consolation, though with the greatest danger to himself; for it ap- 
peared a political method to expose the victims of justice, none being know- 
ingly permitted to approach them. Whatever he heard, however, to relieve 
the dreadful suspense of his friend, the taciturnity of the jailor tended to 
contradict, as little could be obtained of information from him, except his as- 
suring him every night, that he would be certainly hanged on the morrow. 

However, on the morn of the fifteenth day, when he had ventured to dis- 
engage himself of a part of his dress, for the purpose of a temporary relief 
from the weight of his chains, the answer of Toussaint arrived, bringing, in- 
stead of (as was fully expected) the confirmation of the sentence, an order 
from that truly great man for his release, and to be suffered to proceed on 
his voyage, with this prohibition, conveyed with much shrewdness, but the 
greatest magnanimity, “That he must never return to this island without 
proper passports!” 

To describe his feelings on such an unexpected reverse would be difficult 
and useless. Restored to himself once more, he did not long remain on a part 
of the island where his sufferings would have tended to efface the agreeable 
impressions received at Cape Francois. Once he tried to trace the haunts of 
his benevolent incognita, but in vain. She was impervious. He again bade 
adieu to this interesting soil, and at length reached his long-desired destina- 
tion, the island of Martinique.” 


CHAP. V. 
View of the Black Army, and the War between the French 
Republic and the Independent Blacks of St. Domingo. 


THE Close of the eighteenth century, a period marked by the grandest opera- 
tions and the most gigantic projects, presented to the world, a new and organ- 
ised empire, where it was not only supposed to be impossible to exist, but, 


“Tt is necessary to add, that on his arrival he met with the usual kindness and urbanity 
of the commander in chief, General Cuyler, who ordered him a remuneration for the loss 
of his baggage, and to whom he is indebted for many polite attentions since. He has been 
also informed, that he was honored with a congratulatory letter from his Royal Highness 
the Duke of York, which, from some unaccountable accident, he did not receive. [Rains- 
ford’s mention of Cuyler indicates that he could only have arrived in Martinique prior to 
May 1798, when Cuyler was replaced and sailed back to Great Britain. See the Introduc- 
tion. | 


CHAPTER V 149 


where even its existence was denied, although it was known by those con- 
nected with that quarter of the globe to have taken place, and under the most 
flourishing auspices. The beneficent and able black, Toussaint L'Ouverture, 
devoid of the extraneous policy of the governors of ancient states, no sooner 
found himself at ease from the complicated warfare with which, from the first 
moment of his government he had been surrounded, than he evinced equal 
talents for the arts of peace, with those which he had invariably displayed in 
the field; and that mercy which had ever accompanied him in victory, now 
transfused itself in a mild and humane policy in the legislature. His first care 
was to establish, on a firm foundation, the ordinances of religion, according 
to the existing constitutions of society, to watch over the morals, and excite 
the industry of those who had committed themselves to his charge.?®° 

The effects of these exertions were quickly evident throughout his domin- 
ion. Such was the progress of agriculture from this period, that the succeed- 
ing crop produced (notwithstanding the various impediments, in addition 
to the ravages of near a ten years war) full one third of the quantity of sugar 
and coffee, which had ever been produced at its most prosperous period. The 
increase of population was such, as to astonish the planters resident in the 
mother country, who could not conceive the possibility of preventing that 
falling off, in the numbers of the negroes, which formed their absolute neces- 
sity for supplying them by the slave-trade. Health, became prevalent through- 
out the country, with its attendant, cheerfulness, that exhilarator of labour. 

Having introduced in a prominent light the surprising character, to whose 
talents and energies, the inhabitants of this regenerated island were indebted 
for their then existing advantages, it becomes necessary to present the reader 
with a view of the circumstances which accompanied a life so important in 
the history of St. Domingo. 

TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE was born a slave in the year 1745, on the estate 
of the Count de Noé,?** at a small distance from Cape François, in the north- 
ern province of St. Domingo, a spot since remarkable as the very source of 
revolution,” and site of a camp, (that of Breda,) from whence its native gen- 
eral has issued mandates more powerful than those of any monarch on the 
earth. 

While tending his master’s flocks, the genius of Toussaint began to expand 
itself, by an attention towards objects beyond the reach of his comprehen- 
sion; and without any other opportunity than was equally possessed by those 
around him, who remained nearly in impenetrable ignorance, he learnt to 
read, write, and use figures. Encouraged by the progress he rapidly made in 
these arts, and fired with the prospect of higher attainments, he employed 


*See Chapter III. of this work. 


o Lt - Leur JIN Ht 


Toussaint Louverture. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books 
and Manuscripts, Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State 
University Libraries. 


CHAPTER V 151 


himself assiduously in the further cultivation of his talents. His acquirements, 
as is oftentimes the case, under such circumstances, excited the admiration 
of his fellow slaves, and fortunately attracted the attention of the attorney, or 
manager of the estate, M. Bayou de Libertas.”®” This gentleman, with a dis- 
crimination honorable to his judgment, withdrew Toussaint from the labour 
of the fields, to his own house, and began the amelioration of his fortune, by 
appointing him his postilion,” an enviable situation among slaves, for its 
profit, and comparative respectability. 

This instance of patronage by M. Bayou, impressed itself strongly on the 
susceptible mind of Toussaint. True genius and elevated sentiments are in- 
separable; the recollection of the most trivial action, kindly bestowed in ob- 
scurity, or under the pressure of adverse circumstances, warms the heart of 
sensibility, even in the hour of popular favor, more than the proudest honors. 
This truth was exemplified by the subsequent gratitude of Toussaint towards 
his master. He continued to deserve and receive promotion, progressively, to 
offices of considerable confidence. 

Among other traits fondly preserved in St. Domingo of the conduct of 
Toussaint during the early period of his life, are his remarkable benevolence 
towards the brute creation, and an unconquerable patience. Of the former, 
many instances are related which evince a mind endued with every good 
quality. He knew how to avail himself so well of the sagacity of the horse, as 
to perform wonders with that animal, without those cruel methods used to 
extort from them the docility exhibited in Europe; he was frequently seen 
musing amongst the different cattle, seeming to hold a species of dumb con- 
verse, which they evidently understood, and produced in them undoubted 
marks of attention. They knew and manifested their acquaintance, whenever 
he appeared; and he has been frequently seen attending with the anxiety of 
a nurse any accident which had befallen them; the only instance in which he 
could be roused to irritation, was when a slave had revenged the punishment 
he received from his owner upon his harmless and unoffending cattle. Prov- 
erbial became his patience, insomuch that it was a favorite amusement of the 
young and inconsiderate upon the same estate, to endeavour to provoke him 
by wanton tricks and affected malignity. But so perfectly he had regulated 
his temper, that he constantly answered with a meek smile, and accounted 
for their conduct by such means, as would render it strictly pardonable. To 
the law of self-preservation, or the misfortune of not knowing the delight of 
philanthropy, he would attribute an act of brutal selfishness; while he im- 
puted to a momentary misapprehension, an inclination to rude and malicious 
controversy. Thus was his passive disposition never in the smallest degree 
affected, being ready on all occasions to conciliate and to bear, in circum- 
stances whether frivolous or of the highest importance. 


152 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


At the age of twenty-five Toussaint attached himself to a female of similar 
character to his own, and their union cemented by marriage, which does not 
appear to have been violated, conferred respectability on their offspring?#° 
Still he continued a slave; nor did the goodness of M. Bayou, although it ex- 
tended to render him as happy as the state of servitude would admit, ever 
contemplate the manumission of one who was to become a benefactor to him 
and his family. Such is the effect of ancient prejudice, in obscuring, the high- 
est excellence of our nature; he who would perform godlike actions without 
hesitation, from any other cause, shrinks from a breach of etiquette, or a vio- 
lation of custom! 

In the comforts of a situation possessing a degree of opulence, Toussaint 
found leisure to extend the advantages of his early acquisitions, and by the 
acquaintance of some priests, who possessed little more of the character than 
the name, acquired the knowledge of new sources of information, and a rel- 
ish for books of a superior order than first attracted his attention; the author 
of whom he became the most speedily enamoured, was the Abbé Raynal, on 
whose history and speculations in philosophy and politics he was intent for 
weeks together, and never quitted, but with an intention to return, with re- 
newed and additional pleasure. A French translation of Epictetus?’ for a time 
confined him to its doctrines, which he often quoted; but he soon sought 
higher food for his capacious mind, and found in a portion of the ancient his- 
torians, the summit of his wishes. He was there seen studiously consulting 
the opinion of those who teach the conduct of empires, or the management 
of war; yet, he neglected not those who aim to harmonize the mind, and 
teach man himself; the only difference in his habits imbibing these treasures 
created, was, an external polish, which imparted an uncommon grace to his 


manners.” 


“The following books were conspicuous in the library of Toussaint, a list of which was 
handed to the author in consequence of his inquiries respecting the progress of his mind: 

Scriptores de re Militari. [Vegetius, De Re Militari. ] 

Caesar’s Commentaries, French translation, by DeCrisse. [Lancelot Turpin de Crissé, 
Commentaires de César, avec notes historiques, critiques et militaires (3 vols., 1785).] 

Des Claison’s History of Alexander and Caesar. [M. Desclaisons, Précis des histoires 
d'Alexandre le Grand et de Jules César, et de leurs faits militaires, soit comparés soit opposés entre 
eux; suivi de différents points de comparaison ou opposition entre ces deux généraux (2 vols, 
1784).] 

D'Orleans’s History of Revolutions in England and Spain. [Pierre Joseph d'Orléans, His- 
toire des révolutions d'Angleterre depuis le commencement de la monarchie (1689) and Histoire 
des révolutions d’Espagne, depuis la destruction de l'empire des Goths, jusqu'à l'entière et parfaite 
réunion des royaumes de Castille et d'Aragon en une seule monarchie (3 vols, 1734).] 

Marshal Saxe’s Military Reveries. [Maurice de Saxe, Mes Réveries (1757).] 


CHAPTER V 153 


Thus proceeded this illustrious man: like the simple acorn, first promiscu- 
ously scattered by the winds, in its slow but beauteous progress to the gigan- 
tic oak, spreading its foliage with august grandeur, above the minor growth 
of the forest, defending the humble shrub, and braving the fury of contend- 
ing elements. 

Continuing on the estate on which he was born, when the deliberations 
preceding the actual rebellion of the slaves, were taking place upon the plan- 
tation of Noé, the opinion of him who was always regarded with esteem 
and admiration was solicited. His sanction was of importance, as he had a 
number of slaves under his command, and a general influence over his fel- 
low negroes* Among the leaders of this terrible revolt were several of his 
friends, who he had deemed worthy to make his associates for mutual intel- 
ligence; yet, from whatever cause is not ascertained, he forbore in the first 
instance to join in the contest of liberty. It is probable that his manly heart 
revolted from cruelties attendant on the first burst of revenge in slaves about 
to retaliate their wrongs and sufferings on their owners. He saw that the inno- 
cent would suffer with the guilty; and that the effects of revolution regarded 
future, more than present justice. When the cloud charged with electric fluid 
becomes too ponderous, it selects not the brooding murderer on the barren 
heath, but bursts, perhaps indiscriminately, in wasteful vengeance, o'er inno- 
cent flocks reposing in verdant fields. 

There were ties which connected Toussaint more strongly than the con- 
sideration of temporary circumstances. These were, gratitude for the benefits 
received from his master, and generosity to those who were about to fall, — 
not merely beneath the stroke of the assassin, for that relief from their suf- 
ferings was not to be allowed to all, but likewise the change of situations of 
luxury and splendour, to an exile of danger, contempt, and poverty, with all 
the miseries such a reverse can accumulate. 

Toussaint prepared for the emigration of M. Bayou de Libertas, as if he had 
only removed for his pleasure, to the American continent. He found means to 
embark produce that should form a useful provision for the future; procured 


Guischard’s Military Memoirs of the Greeks and Romans. [Karl Gottlieb Guichard, Mé- 
moires militaires sur les Grecs et les Romains (1757). | 

Herodotus, History of the Wars of the Persians against the Greeks. [Herodotus, The His- 
tories. | 

Le Beau’s Memoirs of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres. [Charles Le Beau, 
Histoire de l'Académie royale des inscriptions et belles-lettres, avec les mémoires de littérature 
(1759-77).] 

Lloyd’s Military and Political Memoirs; the Works of the English Socrates, Plutarch, 
Cornelius Nepos, &c. &c. &c. [Henry Lloyd, The History of the Late War in Germany (1766).] 


154 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


his escape with his family, and contrived every plan for his convenience: nor 
did his care end here, for after M. Bayou’s establishment in safety at Balti- 
more, in Maryland, he availed himself of every opportunity to supply any 
conceived deficiency, and, as he rose in circumstances, to render those of his 
protégé more qualified to his situation, and equal to that warm remembrance 
of the services he owed him, which would never expire. 

Having provided for the safety of his master in the first instance, Toussaint 
no longer resisted the temptations to join the army of his country, which had 
(at this period) assumed a regular form.* He attached himself to the corps 
under the command of a courageous black chief, named Biassou, and was ap- 
pointed next in command to him. Though possessed of striking abilities, the 
disposition of this general rendered him unfit for the situation which he held; 
his cruelty caused him to be deprived of a power which he abused.??? No one 
was found equally calculated, to supply his place, with the new officer, Tous- 
saint; therefore, quitting for ever a subordinate situation, he was appointed 
to the command of a division. 

If during this early period of his life, the black general had shone conspicu- 
ously, through every disadvantage, with the brightest talents and the milder 
virtues, he now rose superior to all around him, with the qualities and rank 
of an exalted chief. Every part of his conduct was marked by judgment and 
benevolence. By the blacks, who had raised him to the dignity he enjoyed, 
he was beloved with enthusiasm; and, by the public characters of other na- 
tions, with whom he had occasion to communicate, he was regarded with 
every mark of respect and esteem. General Laveaux called him “the negro, 
the Spartacus, foretold by Raynal, whose destiny it was to avenge the wrongs 


committed on his race:”2%3 


and the Spanish Marquis d’Hermona”™ declared, 
in the hyperbole of admiration, that “if the Supreme had descended on earth, 
he could not inhabit a heart more apparently good, than that of Toussaint 
L'Ouverture?2° 

His powers of invention in the art of war, and domestic government, the 
wonder of those who surrounded, or opposed him, had not previously an op- 
portunity for exhibition as at the period to which we have arrived in this his- 
tory. Embarrassed by a variety of contending factions among the blacks, and 
by enemies of different nations and characters, he was too much occupied in 
evading the blows constantly meditated in different quarters, to find leisure 
for the display of that wisdom and magnanimity which he so eminently exer- 
cised. Nevertheless, a variety of incidents are recorded in the fleeting memo- 


“It is pleasing to reflect, that Toussaint was not the only instance of a similar conduct to 
the present. It occurred, with many variations, in numerous cases; an eminent instance 
of which will be found in the third chapter of this work. 


CHAPTERV 155 


rials of the day to corroborate the excellence of his character, and still more 
are impressed on the memory of all who have visited the scene of his gov- 
ernment. Notwithstanding the absoluteness of military jurisdiction, which 
existed with extra power, no punishment ever took place without the anxious 
endeavours of the General in Chief to avoid it, exerted in every way that could 
be devised. No object was too mean for his remonstrance, or advice; nor any 
crime too great to be subjected to the rules he had prescribed to himself. The 
punishment of the idle or immoral labourer was, being withdrawn from agri- 
culture, and condemned to a military service dangerous or severe. In cases 
of treason he was peculiarly singular in his ideas, and the following incident 
will afford a specimen: — 

Shortly after General Maitland arrived upon the island, four Frenchmen 
were retaken who had deserted the black chief with aggravated treachery. 
Every one expected a vindictive punishment, and of course a cruel death. 
Leaving them, however, in suspence as to their fate, he ordered them to be 
produced in church on the following Sabbath, and, while that part of the ser- 
vice was pronouncing which respects mutual forgiveness, he went with them 
to the front of the altar, where, impressing them with the flagitiousness of 
their conduct, he ordered them to be discharged without farther punishment. 

It probably may be expected that something should be mentioned of the 
general character of Toussaint; and, if there was any object predominant in 
the wishes of the writer during his sojourn at the Cape, it was—to ascertain 
the traits of peculiarity in that individual, — to judge of the views, and of the 
motives that actuated him. The result of his observations was in every re- 
spect favorable to this truly great man. Casual acts of justice and benignity 
may mark the reign of anarchy itself, and complacency sometimes smooth 
the brow of the most brutal tyrant; but when the man, possessed for a con- 
siderable period, of unlimited power, (of whose good actions no venal jour- 
nalist was the herald, but, to transcribe his errors a thousand competitors 
were ready) has never been charged with its abuse; but, on the contrary, has 
preserved one line of conduct, founded by sound sense and acute discern- 
ment on the most honorable basis, leaning only to actions of magnanimity 
and goodness; he has passed the strongest test to which he can be submitted; 
who, with the frailties of human nature, and without the adventitious aids of 
those born to rule, held one of the highest situations in society. 

His government does not appear to have been sullied by the influence of 
any ruling passion; if a thirst of power had prompted him alone, he would 
have soon ceased to be a leader of insurgents; had avarice swayed him, he, 
like many others, could have retired early in the contest, with immense 
riches, to the neighbouring continent; or had a sanguinary revenge occu- 
pied his mind, he would not so often have offered those pathetic appeals to 


156 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the understanding, which were the sport of his colleagues, on crimes which 
the governors of nations long civilized would have sentenced to torture! His 
principles, when becoming an actor in the revolution of his country, were as 
pure and legitimate, as those which actuated the great founders of liberty in 
any former age or clime. 

Such was the character of Toussaint L’Ouverture, as regarded his office of 
Commander in Chief, and Governor of the island of St. Domingo. In his re- 
lations towards other countries, he appears to have excited admiration for 
his justice, and the courtesy of every enlightened state: the charges of his 
most inveterate enemies never extended to a fact that can diminish the well- 
earned eulogies he has obtained. His rules of conduct were the emanations of 
a mind capacious and well informed; and but for the exertions of his talents, 
or those of some chief equally able, indefatigable, and sincere, the country, 
now blooming with culture, and advancing in true civilization, might have 
been a ruined state, sacrificed to the conflicts of disappointed ambition, re- 
venge, and the whole train of evils which a multiplicity of factions could cre- 
ate. That there should be found partizans of each of these factions in the then 
divided state of France, to complain of every arrangement formed by this as- 
tonishing individual, is to be expected, rather than wondered at; and to these 
motives alone, there is no reason to doubt, may be ascribed all the calumnies 
which have been vented against him. 

In his private life, Toussaint lost none of the excellence of that character 
which is conspicuous in his public actions. With much sensibility, he sup- 
ported an even temper in domestic privacy; and in contra-distinction to the 
general custom of other great men, might be considered equally an hero in 
the closet as the field. To his wife, a sensible and affectionate woman, he 
behaved with the most endearing tenderness and consideration, and to his 
children imparted all the warmth of paternal affection; yet he had no over- 
weening fondness to conceal their faults from his notice, even the smallest 
want of proper attention to an inferior, was censured with severity propor- 
tionate to the difference of their condition. If they obtained not knowledge 
from the transitory nature of human circumstances, so necessary to check 
the pride of birth or situation, almost always manifest in children reared in 
affluence, it was not the fault of a father whose life was conspicuous for hu- 
mility of disposition, and a diffidence of his powers, proportionable to the 
elevation of his rank, or the accumulation of his honors. As his children grew 
to an age capable of that education which his individual acquirements in- 
structed him as necessary to the sphere of life in which they were to move, 
Toussaint procured for them the best tutors he could obtain, and afterwards 
sent them to France under their care, for the advantages of higher instruc- 
tion. — His leisure, which was not great, was occupied in relieving those 


CHAPTER V 157 


who suffered in any way undeservedly; nor did he, as is often the case in the 
world, weigh guilt by incapacity or distinction. The weak of every description 
were his peculiar care; the strong in intellect, the mighty in war, or the ami- 
able in domestic life, shared alike his esteem. 

In person, Toussaint was of a manly form, above the middle stature, with a 
countenance bold and striking, yet full of the most prepossessing suavity — 
terrible to an enemy, but inviting to the objects of his friendship or his love.2°7 
His manners and his deportment were elegant when occasion required, but 
easy and familiar in common;—when an inferior addressed him, he bent with 
the most obliging assiduity, and adapted himself precisely, without seeming 
condescension, to their peculiar circumstances. He received in public a gen- 
eral and voluntary respect, which he was anxious to return, or rather to pre- 
vent, by the most pleasing civilities. His uniform was a kind of blue jacket, 
with a large red cape falling over the shoulders; red cuffs, with eight rows 
of lace on the arms, and a pair of large gold epaulettes thrown back; scarlet 
waistcoat and pantaloons, with half boots; round hat, with a red feather, and 
a national cockade; these, with an extreme large sword, formed his equip- 
ment. — He was an astonishing horseman, and travelled with inconceivable 
rapidity. 

Thus are given the rough outlines of the character of Toussaint; for the 
shades it will be necessary to consider what foibles could have existence with 
the virtues described. It is not intended to sully the present account by the ab- 
surdity of attempting to hold him up as a perfect character; but thus much is 
certain, that if he had any peculiar vices, he had the address to conceal them 
from the most scrutinous and industrious observer. 

Toussaint, surrounded by men of letters and science, whom various cir- 
cumstances had brought from the mother country found little difficulty in 
the formation of a temporary constitution, of which justice and equality (of 
right only, not of property) should be the basis. Among those from whom he 
received important assistance was the Citizen Pascal, a descendant of the 
celebrated writer of that name, who inherited the talents of his ancestor. He 
had been sent to Cape Frangois by the Executive Directory, in the fourth year 
of the revolution, as secretary to the agents of the republic; when he married 
the daughter of a mulatto in office, named Raymond,” and acquired by the 
connection a considerable property. He attached himself early to Toussaint, 
with the Abbé Moliere, and an Italian ecclesiastic, of considerable talents, 
named Martini, who were always about his person.” 


“Filling every public office with men of talents and letters in France, (as they confess- 
edly do,) it was scarcely possible to appoint any but persons of ability to the foreign depart- 
ments; which accounts for the easy acquisition of such persons, to the liberal Toussaint. 


158 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Having settled the grand object of his care, particularly as regarded the 
safety of the white inhabitants, he next devoted himself to the regulation 
and increase of his army, on a scale fitting the importance of the country 
under his care. At the time of his treaty with General Maitland, his force in 
the northern province amounted to something less than 40,000 men, but 
they were soon increased to nearly double that number, and at this time 
exceeded all conception.” As they were necessarily divided in the different 
provinces, he prepared for a journey round the island for the purpose of re- 
viewing them, and appointing the districts, as well as settling the officers to 
command them, with greater success and accuracy than could be done at a 
distance. Vast quantities of ordnance and stores of different kinds were accu- 
mulated at different posts, which would be more useful when distributed. He 
was desirous of becoming known to a great number of brave men who were 
attached to his army, many of whom had received a military education in the 
mother country, and could be placed in situations of responsibility; others, 
too, required local appointments, for the purpose of residing in situations 
with which they were acquainted; and it was the wish and policy of Toussaint, 
to know and gratify them all. —The animation of his presence was also neces- 
sary to troops, (in some few instances, perhaps, languid, ) who were ambitious 
of being seen by their General in Chief, whose very name acted with electric 
force on all. In the capital of the Spanish part of the island, another reason 
proved the necessity of a visit from the General in Chief. Notwithstanding the 
cession of the Spanish colony to France in 1795, and that it had been taken 
possession of by the generals Paul L Ouverture,’ (the brother of Toussaint,) 
and D’Hebecour,?” who had garrisoned the different posts, a force still re- 
mained in the city of St. Domingo, under Don Joachim Garcia, insubordi- 
nate to the present government; Toussaint, therefore, with that promptitude 
for which he was remarkable, though not without due consideration, set out 
upon this important tour. 


*Colonel Chalmers, in his “Remarks on the late War in St. Domingo,” supposes certain 
muster-rolls, which he describes to have been in the possession of Toussaint’s adjutant- 
general at the Mole, stating the force (in that quarter) at 35,000 men, to contain the 
whole effective force of the island, and even then ridicules the idea of its being so strong! 
It causes an involuntary smile to see such opinions seriously delivered, or to observe the 
mutual censures of General Maitland and Toussaint, for not continuing a war of annihi- 
lation, by Colonel Chalmers on one side, and Stephen Mentor, the black seceder, on the 
other. [Etienne Mentor (1771-1806) was born to a free black family in Martinique. He 
gained recognition fighting the British in Guadeloupe. Sent to St. Domingo, he found him- 
self at odds with Toussaint’s policies and opposed negotiating with the English. He also 
opposed independence and was an elected French representative in Paris until Napoleon 
came to power. He returned to St. Domingo and sided with Dessalines. He was himself 
assassinated a few days after Dessalines. ] 


CHAPTER V 159 


The reception the General met with in every town and village through 
which he passed, and at every port he visited, was such as to have gratified the 
vanity of the proudest potentate. All orders, civil or military, vied with each 
other in their modes of respect, while the women and children lined the road 
sides, to bless the pacificator of their country. On every face was depicted 
content and health, and in every place appeared universal satisfaction. Every 
means were used to declare the general pleasure with which he was viewed. 
Garlands, and fantastic wreaths, were woven by those who could do no more. 
Superb decorations covered the houses of proprietors, and triumphal arches 
graced his entry to every town. The military, in their proudest array, were 
anxious to obtain approbation by a soldier-like appearance, and a variety of 
plans were formed by the maritime people to testify their accordance with 
the public respect. Innumerable instances might be mentioned which would 
assume the air of romance, of the singular testimonies which occurred to 
honor him, and do justice to his character. 

In one place, a respectable negro, of the age of ninety-nine, seated on a 
wicker chair, presented to him ten sons, the children of one wife, employed 
in agriculture, but ready to devote themselves to the service of their coun- 
try whenever it should be necessary. Three sisters hung over their father, as 
if fearing to lose the protection of their brothers. All produced certificates 
of propriety and industry from their employers, and their neighbours, a part 
of whom surrounded them. Toussaint leaped from his horse, and knelt at 
the feet of the old man. “Respectable age,” said he, “it is to such members 
as you, that your country is this day indebted for peace and freedom!” As he 
arose, an aid-de-camp directed his attention to a solitary youth, who stood 
at a short distance, unnoticed. “Who is that,” exclaimed the General, “appar- 
ently miserable on such a day?” He was informed it was one who had dis- 
graced the family now presented to him, in many instances, and had lately 
encouraged his sister in vice. At this moment an interesting female rushed 
from the crowd, holding an infant in her arms, with the appearance of ex- 
treme anguish, exclaiming, “It is for me, General, that the poor Antony is 
calumniated.” — Her tears interrupted her. —“I could not part with my child, 
though rejected by his father, and denied even permission to labour in the 
same plantation with my family, because I quitted it, and nearly starving, en- 
gaged myself to another less desirable. — My affectionate brother lent me all 
the aid his own labours could spare, and when I was to remove, solicited an 
addition from my other brothers and sisters. He was refused, and he” —“He 
robbed them, perhaps, to supply you,” interrupted the General; “thereby vio- 
lating his duty to his family, his country, and himself; — this is wrong; — there 
was something, likewise, erroneous in withholding your child from the pro- 


160 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


tection it would have received; yet,” turning to the old man who had claimed 
his approbation, “we must not, father, reject the unfortunate; it is not suffi- 
cient to be just, we must also be merciful, recollecting how much need we 
all have for mercy. Sully, not, therefore, the happiness you enjoy, with the 
recollection of one individual less happy by your means, much more your 
son, (leading him towards the old man,) or your daughter, (doing the same).” 
The impressive manner of the General (though the transaction lasted but a 
few minutes) drew tears from the whole; the family instantly caressed their 
brother and sister, and Toussaint, re-mounting his horse, was quickly out of 
sight. 

He never stooped to court the attention of the multitude, but having re- 
turned the civilities which every where crowded upon him, galloped on, 
leaving his aides, or whoever accompanied him, frequently out of sight. In- 
numerable acts of discriminative goodness are related of him during this 
route, and the day, where-ever he was, was a day of peace and pleasure. 

The effects of this tour were very evident, by the uniform reformation in 
every part of the island. The municipal governments were brought into one 
general system, and a chain of communication established. The different bri- 
gades were rendered more effective by the better arrangement of the troops 
composing them, and armed posts were established throughout the island, 
well supplied with the ordnance his enemies had left behind. In fact, every 
part was put in a situation to withstand the utmost force of an enemy, how- 
ever powerful, and to dispute with them every inch of ground. Nor, during 
an attention to the internal safety of the country in a military view, were its 
maritime interests forgotten, every commercial encouragement was offered 
to the neighbouring islands and the continent; the safety of the whites was 
established, and their power of injuring the state curtailed. 

Toussaint returned to the Cape, accompanied by a numerous suite, in 
which was a selection of the principal talents of the island. He was received 
with redoubled pleasure to what he had previously experienced on returning 
to the capital, from the length of his absence, and the reports of his conduct, 
which had preceded him from every quarter. Neither was this fame confined 
to the boundaries of St. Domingo; it ran through Europe, and in France his 
name was frequently pronounced in the Senate with the eulogy of polished 
eloquence. 

It being necessary that the constitution, which in effect now existed, should 
be published, for the assurance of its permanent execution, and the proper 
understanding of the different inhabitants and relations of the island, it was 
proclaimed on the ist of July 1801. At the head of the ceremony appeared the 
General in Chief, and the code was promulgated in the name “of the people.” 


CHAPTER V 161 


The intercourse between France and St. Domingo, which had been de- 
creasing for some time previous to the proclamation, now ceased altogether, 
except by private correspondence, which was considerably checked. Still 
the late proprietors resident in or near the French metropolis, languished 
for the recovery of their former importance, and every account of the flour- 
ishing state of their beloved colony, awakened each lingering wish to new, 
but vain hopes of a restoration. They even imagined, in every amelioration 
of the island, an additional chance of succeeding to their desires, till they 
had schemed plans of operation, and imagined means of execution, which 
themselves only could have devised or understood. These were constantly 
obtruded on the French government, who were too much employed in the 
complicated politics of Europe to admit them into their views, and all that 
they obtained was the promises with which they were bribed, as the price of 
forbearance from anti-revolutionary projects at home. 

But a time was approaching when accident produced in a moment what the 
labour of years could not effect, and obtained for these misguided persons, 
the interference their restless spirits desired. The government of France, 
having assumed a novel and original form under the influence of a victorious 
dictator,*°' for whose firm establishment it required an interval of peace; and 
the politics of that country, which was the remaining enemy of the republic, 
and the only nation in Europe capable of contending with her, suggesting a 
similar measure, the two countries, after communicating with political sin- 
cerity, came to the determination of a cessation of hostilities, and the prelimi- 
naries were accordingly executed.* Thus the naval power of France, which 
for nine years had not sailed from her ports with impunity from the terror of 
the British flag throughout the globe, was at liberty to perform all its crippled 
state would permit, and to improve that state with every possible advantage.” 

This was but a part of the circumstances arising from the peace of Europe 
favorable to the expatriated colonists of St. Domingo. The labours of Bona- 
parte, First Consul of the Republic, hitherto limited in exertions of mili- 
tary prowess, whose rapidity and effect gave no opportunity for objection or 
scrutiny, were now to be submitted to the test of cool examination. That per- 
sonal courage which had conquered a great part of the continent of Europe, 
subverted foreign states, and removed a divided senate at home, would not 
avail in the convictions of philosophy, or the conciliation of jarring interests 


“It is painful (and dangerous) to hear the prevalence of an opinion, even from those who 
should be better informed, that the creation of a French navy is impossible, and that it is 
not an object of contemplation in the present ruler of France. That it is both the one and 
the other is most certain, and the writer will be less prophetic than he has been, if a very 
few years do not exhibit a confirmation. 


162 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


in a state of peace. It became, therefore, necessary to obtain a powerful in- 
fluence in the cabinet as well as in the field, and to assure to himself other 
interests than those of humanity. 

At this period the party who had constantly beset the existing ministry, did 
not neglect a single opportunity of redoubling their appeals to the present 
government, or of availing themselves of every circumstance, to attach to 
their cause a more powerful weight than it then possessed. They held out, 
in temptations of the most florid description, the advantages daily lost to 
commerce; and those who had till now been occupied in fitting out numbers 
of privateers, began to think of an advantageous employment of their capi- 
tal; others, whom the war had confined to France, contemplated with plea- 
sure trans-atlantic views, and the enterprizing regarded the troubles in St. 
Domingo, as an inviting opportunity of distinguishing themselves. In fact, 
every description of people became interested in the recovery of the colony, 
forgetting what had passed in regard to the abolition of slavery in the same 
metropolis; it became a popular cause, was introduced into the assemblies, 
and the ladies became partizans, headed by the favorite sister of the First 
Consul, the lady of General Le Clerc.” The mania spread into England with 
the beauties of the Consular court, and that nation, where the ministry and 
people had blindly desired the abolition, at the expence of a portion of their 
empire of commerce, and the ruin of a large body of colonists, still more 
blindly joined in the popular wish of returning to slavery, those who were 
completely emancipated. 

Bonaparte viewed the growing spirit with silence, and, it may be, not with- 
out some regard to the character the victorious Black had obtained in the 
mother country. A variety of circumstances contributed to convince him of 
the necessity of some attention (in the first instance) to the powerful requests 
which poured in from every quarter; the instance, also, of a power bidding 
him defiance in a country which had not, by any regular process, become 
separated from that government over which he was called to preside, was 
repugnant to his feelings in the rank in which he was elevated. Madame Le 
Clerc, partaking in the ambition ascribed to her brother, urged the measure 
of reducing the island, to procure for her husband and herself something 
more than was to be derived from basking in the beams of the First Con- 
sul; and the appointment of General Le Clerc*™ to a splendid conquest, was 
confining the dignity of it to the family. When the inclination of Bonaparte 
was understood to be favorable to the prospects of the colonists, means were 
found to interest the most powerful merchants in their behalf and urged by 
those, on whose aid (in the present stage of his government) he was aware 
much was to depend, this penetrating man, without any other information 


CHAPTER V 163 


than that derived through so partial a medium, consented to an expedition 
that was to become an eternal blot upon a career, if not often just or humane, 
at least always able, and frequently magnificent. 

As, to devise and execute were the same thing with the First Consul, this 
baneful expedition was no sooner determined on, than after forming a plan 
for the government of the colonies, and submitting to the British govern- 
ment the circumstances of its destination, to prevent the alarm which it must 
naturally create, its preparation was commenced, to add another shade to the 
darkened side of human nature. 

At the head of the expedition was placed General Le Clerc, and such was 
the confidence of its success, that he was accompanied by his lady, and her 
younger brother, Jerome Bonaparte.” General Rochambeau, who had 
been a proprietor, assisted with his advice the commander in chief, and 
also commanded a division. To them were added Generals Kerversan?” and 
Boudet,’ with a force of twenty thousand men. The two sons of Toussaint 
L'Ouverture who had been educated in France, were sent as hostages for the 
reception of the French army by their father, under the care of the tutors 
who had accompanied them. Admiral Villaret*® (who was in the service of 
the regal government of France) commanded the fleet, under whom were 


310 


Rear-Admiral Latouche,” and Captain Magon.*" The fleet consisted of some 


of the best ships of the line, and a proportionable number of frigates, trans- 
ports, &c. The prevalent sentiment seemed to be, that after the first attack, a 
compromise would be effected with Toussaint and the different chiefs, which 
would enable the French force to establish itself throughout the island, and 
complete the subjugation of the armed blacks.* 

In the month of December the expedition sailed, amidst the acclamations 
of all, who were either interested in its success, or imagined themselves so; 


The absurdity of this idea, when the state of St. Domingo at the time is considered, 
and the accumulated strength which the General in Chief had acquired from the defeat of 
every enemy, as well as the experience which the different contentions had afforded him, 
is a sufficient proof of the inconsideration with which Bonaparte was hurried into this ill- 
contrived and ruinous measure. The writer did not omit any means, both with those in 
power and otherwise, to convince them of the futility of the scheme, and to caution the 
British government against the temptation afforded to Admiral Villaret, to turn his course 
to a more accessible destination. But such was the pre-determined state of the public 
mind, that his opinions and his cautions were alike disregarded. Both have, however, been 
fully corroborated; and if the “feeble and divided” blacks had not given a better account of 
the French expedition, worse effects of such an inattention might have been experienced. 
As a curiosity, when compared with the French General’s dispatches, the anticipation of 
his fate, as published at the Military Library in London in the beginning of 1802, will be 
found in the Appendix to this work. 


164 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


and arrived in the bay of Samana, on the eastern coast of the island, on the 
28th of January, when General Kerversan was dispatched with a division to 
the city of St. Domingo; Rear-Admiral Latouche was ordered to carry the 
troops under the command of General Boudet to Port-au-Prince; and Captain 
Magon to land a division under General Rochambeau in Mancenillo Bay, on 
the northern coast. These divisions were directed so as to surprize different 
points of the island at the same period; General Le Clerc proceeded, with the 
remainder of the troops, to the attack of the Black capital, the city of Cape 
François, where he arrived on the 5th day. Two frigates and a cutter being sent 
to reconnoitre the entrance of the road and adjacent posts, were fired on from 
Fort Picolet. 

In the mean time, the secret operations of the Consular cabinet?” had not 
been neglected; a few civic officers among the blacks, and several whites in 
that part of the country, intended to be first attacked, were prepared, as far as 
they could, to assist the designs of the invading army. The vigilance, however, 
of Toussaint had been exerted, and to every part of the island where invasion 
was expected, or the smallest signs of defection appeared, he had applied 
every means in his power to prevent their approach towards the interior. 
He had many faithful adherents distributed through the posts of danger and 
honor, whose confidence in him nothing could alter. Although cautious of ad- 
mitting any sanguinary law in his government, he had proved to every officer 
under his command the impartiality by which he was guided, in the sacrifice 


of his own nephew, General Moyse," 


when a charge of injustice had been 
proved against him. By attending to the prosecution of the necessary mea- 
sures for the internal defence of the island, General Toussaint was away from 
Cape Francois at the time the expedition arrived. 

General Christophe, who was left in command, on perceiving the approach 
of the French fleet, sent the port captain, an experienced black officer, named 
Sangos, to acquaint the commander of the expedition with the absence of the 
General in Chief; and “that it was necessary to wait the return of a courier he 
had dispatched to him, previous to any steps for the disembarkation of a mili- 
tary force; on a refusal of which he should consider the white people in his 
district as hostages for the conduct of the French; and that the consequence 
of attack upon any place would be its immediate conflagration.”*“ 

Upon this intimation, General Le Clerc conceived it expedient to dissemble 
awhile, till the effects of his interest, strength, and success (in which was in- 
cluded the mayor of the city) should be known, and accordingly began to ad- 
minister the palliatives with which he had been furnished from France. He 
wrote a mild letter to General Christophe, stating the benign intentions of 
the First Consul and himself towards the island, and inviting him to return to 


CHAPTER V 165 


his duty as a French citizen, with the most specious promises. He enclosed 
copies of the proclamations brought with him, and a private letter from Gen- 
eral Bonaparte to the General in Chief, Toussaint. In this letter the Black 
General receives ample indemnity for all that is passed, and the most encour- 
aging promises for the future. “We have conceived for you esteem,” says the 
ruler of France, “and we wish to recognize and proclaim the great services 
you have rendered to the French people: if their colours fly on St. Domingo, 
it is to you, and your brave blacks, that we owe it. Called by your talents and 
the force of circumstances to the chief command, you have closed the civil 
war, put a stop to the persecutions of ferocious men, and restored to honor 
the religion and worship of God, from whom all things come.” Also, “The 
situation in which you were placed, surrounded by enemies, and without the 
mother country being able to succour or sustain you, has rendered legitimate 
the articles of that constitution, which otherwise would not be so.”* This dis- 
patch was borne by a naval officer, named Le Brun, who received in return a 
repetition in effect, but more strongly expressed of the intimation received 
by Sangos. 

A deputation from the town, headed by the mayor, went on board the fleet, 
who represented, with visible terror, that, “on the first signal of a debarka- 
tion, the city and adjoining estates would be set on fire, and the white people 
put to the sword; and entreated General Le Clerc to take their unhappy cir- 
cumstances into consideration”% He received this deputation with the 
greatest complacency, and sent them back with a commission to read the 
proclamation of the First Consul in the town, and to declare his good inten- 
tions towards the inhabitants; Caesar Telemache,*”® the mayor, fulfilled their 
wishes in the most open manner. The result was the same as before; notwith- 
standing the daring conduct of the chief municipal officer and others, and the 
satisfaction of some whites, (who had been protected and encouraged by the 
blacks,) at the prospect of the recapture of the colony. 

General Le Clerc, conceiving his friends to be sufficiently ripe and numer- 
ous for his reception, and impatient to open his splendid career, arranged his 
plan for landing the troops at a point of land called Du Limbé, a few miles to 
the westward, from whence he conceived he might be able to gain the height 
of the Cape before the negroes executed their threatened purpose, or at least, 
land with less injury than he should be able to do, in the face of a well fortified 
capital. Admiral Villaret was ordered to attack the town by sea at the same 


*See Moniteur, (the official journal of France,) March 21, 1802.— Dispatch of Le Clerc. 
[The dispatch was actually published in Le Moniteur, 24 Ventose, year X (March 15, 1802), 
696. | 


166 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


time, which, with the descent of Rochambeau at Fort Dauphin, would form 
a powerful diversion in their favor. The whole was executed with the utmost 
difficulty, the blacks acting up to their orders, which were, “To defend them- 
selves against the French to the last extremity; if possible, to sink their ves- 
sels; and when a position could not be maintained, to set fire to every thing 
in their retreat.”* In the evening, when Le Clerc came within sight of Cape 
François, the city was entirely in flames. The troops halted with dismay to be- 
hold a scene so dreadful, the effects of which they could not arrest, and the 
squadron beheld it in awful horror from the water. The next morning they ap- 
proached the ruins, when every remaining habitation was deserted, and the 
fields lying in waste. The emissaries of the French rallied around their Chief, 
among whom was Caesar Telemaque, who was immediately reinstated in the 
mayoralty. General Humbert,” who had landed a body of twelve hundred 
men, and reduced a fort to facilitate the entry of Le Clerc, had employed his 
men in extinguishing the fire, and saving the city from total destruction. 
Two detachments were immediately dispatched to occupy Port Paix and 
the Mole, who contrived, from the means which had been used before the 
landing of the troops, to enlist (according to their own account) upwards of a 
thousand black soldiers. They, and several of the municipal officers, were at- 
tracted by the proclamations plenteously dispersed, which were as follows: 


Paris, Nov. 8, 1801 
“INHABITANTS OF St. DOMINGO, 

“Whatever your origin or your color, you are all French; you are all equal, 
and all free, before God, and before the Republic. 

“France, like St. Domingo, has been a prey to factions, torn by intestine 
commotions, and foreign wars. But all has changed; all nations have embraced 
the French, and have sworn to them peace and amity; the French people have 
embraced each other, and have sworn to be all friends and brothers. Come 
also, embrace the French, and rejoice to see again your European friends and 
brothers. 

“The government sends you the Captain-General Le Clerc: he has brought 
sufficient force for protecting you against your enemies; and against the ene- 
mies of the Republic. If it be said to you their forces are destined to ravish 
from you your liberty; answer, the Republic will not suffer it to be taken 
from us. 

“Rally round the Captain-General; he brings you abundance and peace. 
Rally all of you around him. Whoever shall dare to separate himself from the 


“Moniteur, March 22. 


CHAPTER V 167 


Captain-General, will be a traitor to his country, and the indignation of the 
country will devour him as the fire devours your dried canes. 
“Done at Paris, &c. 
(Signed) “The First Consul, BONAPARTE. 
“The Secretary of State, H. B. Maret.”?"8 


In the mean time, Toussaint, who had been long preparing for the event, 
had carefully examined the interior, and was approaching the scene of dev- 
astation. Notwithstanding the hostile form in which the French armament 
had approached his seat of government, he was anxious to find, from their 
conduct, if he had to expect an amicable proposition, or any intention to sup- 
port with integrity the relation in which he stood to his countrymen. Well 
acquainted with the political state of Europe, he could not conceive that the 
man, who had confessedly (however advantageous to his country) usurped a 
dictatorial power in France, could contemplate the reduction of one who had 
been called to equal power by the most legitimate of all authority, the voice 
of the people. He knew, that presenting a vast extent of coast, it would be 
impossible to prevent a debarkation at one point or the other, therefore had 
pre-determined to suffer the French to land, if they insisted upon it, after a 
slight annoyance from the forts, or adjacent posts; but, that previous to their 
landing, every preparation should be made for securing the property of the 
inhabitants of the metropolis, or any other town, which should then be set 
on fire, thus preventing them from taking that rest which, after the voyage, 
they would naturally require, and impede their penetration into the interior. 
These operations had been carefully performed, and with so much attention 
to the whites in particular, that many of them returned to their houses, in full 
possession of their property after the capital was in possession of the French. 
Toussaint, satisfied with the state in which he found every preparation for 
defence in the interior, determined to wait the event of the future motions of 
the French commander in chief. 

The letter which the First Consul had written to Toussaint remaining un- 
delivered, the scheme, which a reliance on the feelings of Toussaint had dic- 
tated, was not yet executed. Advices had been received from the other divi- 
sions, that they had with difficulty made good their landing, but all remained, 
as well as Le Clerc, upon the coast, without any attempt to penetrate into the 
interior. It was determined, as Toussaint’s approach was announced, to try 
the effect of the artifice which had been prepared. 

Accordingly Coisnon,*® the tutor of the sons of Toussaint, a confidential 
agent in this expedition, was commissioned to conduct an interview between 
the General and his children, who had been prepared by the caresses of the 


168 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


First Consul, and the enjoyment of every indulgence, to seduce their parent 
to an acquiescence with the measures of the Captain-General Le Clerc. Tous- 
saint possessed a plantation called Ennery, about ten leagues from the Cape, 
where he was returning, which was fixed upon as the scene of the intended 
interview. Thither they repaired, but Toussaint had not returned; they, how- 
ever, met such a reception as might be expected from a tender and affection- 
ate mother to her darling children, so long absent, and to him who appeared 
in the character of their restorer. Coisnon availed himself of the pressing invi- 
tation of this good and hospitable woman to wait the return of her husband, 
that he might ingratiate himself upon the softness of her nature sufficiently 
to win her over as an advocate to his cause. In the mean time, a courier was 
dispatched to Toussaint, who was to bear the pleasing invitation of his chil- 
dren, and the letter of the First Consul. This was as follows: 


“To Citizen Toussaint L’Ouverture, General in Chief of the Army of St. Domingo. 


“CITIZEN-GENERAL, 

“Peace with England and all the powers of Europe, which places the Re- 
public in the first degree of greatness and power, enables at the same time the 
government to direct its attention to St. Domingo. We send thither Citizen Le 
Clerc, our brother-in-law, in quality of Captain-General, as first magistrate of 
the colony. He is accompanied with the necessary forces, to make the sover- 
eignty of the French people respected. It is under these circumstances that 
we are disposed to hope that you will prove to us, and to all France, the sin- 
cerity of the sentiments you have constantly expressed in the different letters 
you have written to us. We have conceived for you esteem, and we wish to 
recognize and proclaim the great services you have rendered to the French 
people. If their colours fly on St. Domingo, it is to you, and your brave blacks, 
that we owe it. Called by your talents, and the force of circumstances, to the 
chief command, you have concluded the civil war, put a stop to the perse- 
cutions of some ferocious men, and restored the honor the religion and the 
worship of God, from whom all things come. 

“The situation in which you were placed, surrounded on all sides by ene- 
mies, and without the mother country being able to succour or sustain you, 
has rendered legitimate the articles of that constitution which otherwise 
could not be so. But, now that circumstances are so happily changed, you will 
be the first to render homage to the sovereignty of the nation, which reckons 
you among the number of its most illustrious citizens, by the services you 
have rendered to it, and by the talents and the force of character with which 
nature has endowed you. A contrary conduct would be irreconcileable with 
the idea we have conceived of you. It would deprive you of your numerous 
claims to the gratitude and the good offices of the Republic, and would dig 


CHAPTER V 169 


under your feet a precipice which, while it swallowed you up, would contrib- 
ute to the misery of those brave blacks, whose courage we love, and whom we 
should be sorry to punish for rebellion. 

“We have made known to your children, and to their preceptor, the senti- 
ments by which we are animated. We send them back to you. Assist with your 
counsel, your influence, and your talents, the Captain-General. What can you 
desire? —the freedom of the blacks? You know that in all the countries we 
have been in; we have given it to the people who had it not. Do you desire 
consideration, honor, fortune? It is not after the services you have rendered, 
the services you can still render, and with the personal estimation we have for 
you, that you ought to be doubtful with respect to your consideration, your 
fortune, and the honors that await you. 

“Make known to the people of St. Domingo, that the solicitude which 
France has always evinced for their happiness, has often been rendered im- 
potent by the imperious circumstances of war; that if men came from the 
Continent to nourish factions, they were the produce of those factions which 
destroyed the country; that in future peace, and the power of government, 
ensure their prosperity and freedom. Tell them, that if liberty be to them the 
first of wants, they cannot enjoy it but with the title of French citizens, and 
that every act contrary to the interests of the country, the obedience they 
owe to the government, and the Captain-General, who is the delegate of it, 
would be a crime against the national sovereignty which would eclipse their 
services, and render St. Domingo the theatre of a cruel war, in which fathers 
and children would massacre each other. 

“And you, General, recollect, that if you are the first of your colour that 
attained such great power, and distinguished himself by his bravery and his 
military talents, you are also before God and us the principal person respon- 
sible for their conduct. 

“If there be disaffected persons, who say to the individuals that have borne 
a principal part in the troubles of St. Domingo, that we are coming to ascer- 
tain what they have done during the times of anarchy, assure them that we 
shall take cognizance of their conduct only in this last circumstance, and that 
we shall not recur to the past, but to find out the traits that may have distin- 
guished them in the war carried on against the Spanish and English, who 
have been our enemies. 

“Rely without reserve on our esteem, and conduct yourself as one of the 
principal citizens of the greatest nation in the world ought to do. 


“The First Consul, BONAPARTE.’ 37° 


On the receipt of these dispatches, Toussaint set out on his return home, 
which he reached the next night. In the intervening day, Coisnon applied 


170 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


his powers of elocution on the wife of Toussaint with ardour equal to the 
baseness of his design. Like the serpent at the ear of the general mother, he 
whispered every delusion that crafty knowledge could devise, to tempt the 
unsuspecting woman, whose caution was enveloped in the delight of enfold- 
ing her children, (who were much improved by the advantages of European 
habits and manners,) to use her soft influence with her husband. Inspired 
by the news that his children were at their paternal home, Toussaint arrived 
with more than common rapidity. The mother shrieked, and became insen- 
sible when he approached; his sons dressed in the uniform of his enemies ran 
to meet him; and (with eyes glistening with the emotions of the father) he 
clasped them without utterance to his arms. 

Of a scene equal to the highest effort of the drama, narration can give no 
semblance, without using the language of passion so dangerous to truth. 
Enough, however, is learned from the self-condemning account of the tutor,” 
to prove, that it was of the most affecting nature. This wretch, with a heart 
cold as the cell in which he was bred, viewed the emotions of this interest- 
ing family, only to take advantage of their situation. When the first burst of 
joy and affection were over, and the hero turned to caress him, to whom he 
immediately owed the delight he had experienced, Coisnon began his attack. 
“I saw them shed tears,” says he, “and, wishing to take advantage of a period 
which I conceived to be favorable, I stopped him at the moment when he 
stretched out his arms to me;” then recapitulated the letters of Bonaparte 
and Le Clerc, and invited him to accede to them. He painted the intentions 
of France towards the island in the most fascinating language; described the 
advantages of resuming its relation with the mother country, and declared, 
with the utmost solemnity, that it was not the intention to interfere with the 
liberty of the blacks; concluding with a wound that struck to the heart of 
Toussaint, —his orders to return with his charge to the Cape immediately, 
if he did not consent. The wife of Toussaint, recovered from the convulsive 
joy with which she was seized, commenced solicitations of a milder kind, 
and, notwithstanding the check, by a frown, from that face which had always 
beamed with tenderness upon her, continued to urge the advantages with 
which she was impressed. The unconscious children described the happi- 
ness in which they had been nurtured, and the hero seemed to hesitate in 
opposing solicitations so tender, when the well practised tutor again assailed 
him, but becoming less cautious, hinted at his immediate junction with the 
Captain-General.**' Toussaint, now confirmed in his suspicions, instantly re- 
tired from the view of his wife and children, and when Coisnon expected, 


“Report of Coisnon to the French ministry. 


CHAPTER V 171 


with infernal pleasure, his fraudulent victory, gave him this dignified deter- 
mination. “Take back my children, if it must be so, I will be faithful to my 
brethren and my God!”??? The characters of father and hero could not agree 
in this trying situation. Toussaint did not risk another sight of his children, 
but in less than two hours from the moment of his arrival, departed again for 
the camp, from whence he returned a formal answer to the letter of General 
Le Clerc. This circumstance appears to have developed in a clearer view the 
intentions of the invaders, and is an explanation of the marked hostility in 
the onset, although professed to be only intended, to re-establish the colonial 
relation of the island to France. The answer was conveyed by Granville, the 
tutor of the younger sons of Toussaint, a Frenchman; and a correspondence 
was continued with the same demands on the one part, and an evasion of sat- 
isfactory explanation on the other. 

At length, finding the surrender of Toussaint not to be accomplished by 
artifice, and wearied with the situation to which he was confined, instead 
of the pleasures of a court, General Le Clerc became impatient, and on the 
arrival of Admiral Gantheaume??” with a supply of two thousand three hun- 
dred men, with the prospect of an additional reinforcement under Admiral 
Linois,*** in a moment of irritation, on the 17th of February, issued a procla- 
mation which seemed designed to hold the French army to contempt, and to 
resign all claim to that ability or design which at least marks their composi- 
tions of this kind. 


“I come,’ says he, “to restore prosperity and abundance! Every one must 
see what an insensible monster he is!” (Toussaint.) “I promise liberty to the 
people of this island. I shall make them rejoice! and I shall respect their per- 
sons and property. I order as follows: 

“Art. I. The General Toussaint and the General Christophe, are put out of 
the protection of the law. All citizens are ordered to pursue them, and to treat 
them as the enemies of the French Republic. 

“IL. From the day on which the French army shall occupy a position, all offi- 
cers, whether civil or military, who shall obey other orders than those of the 
generals of the army which I command, shall be treated as rebels. 

“III. The cultivators, who, seduced into error, and deceived by the perfidi- 
ous insinuations of the rebel general, may have taken arms, shall be regarded 
as children who have strayed, and shall be sent to their plantations, provided 
they do not seek to excite insurrection. 

“IV. The soldiers of the demi-brigade who shall abandon the army of Tous- 
saint, shall be received into the French army. 

(Signed, &c.) LE CLERC. 


Ducua.”35 


172 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


The proclamation was followed by a commencement of the war at all quar- 
ters, and the exercise of every artifice that could be practised to procure de- 
fection in the black camp. The clergy were successfully employed to commu- 
nicate with those of their own order to that effect; thus, those who should 
have mediated in the cause of peace, by undermining the very power which 
protected them, promoted a civil war of accumulated horrors. 

The war was prosecuted by the Captain-General with all the vigor such 
haughty and hyperbolical expressions would imply, but the pride which dic- 
tates high-sounding proclamations, does not always furnish the means of exe- 
cuting them, and in the present instance they arose more from the disap- 
pointed ambition of Le Clerc, than from the power he possessed in the island. 

If Toussaint had hitherto suspended his opinion respecting the intention 
of the French government, he now had no room for doubt. It is not, however, 
to be wondered at, that he should so long have forborne to view them in the 
glaring light in which they presented themselves. That any experienced gen- 
eral, or minister, should be found so weak as to depend solely on the opinion 
and accounts of those who were so deeply interested in the event of a success- 
ful expedition against St. Domingo, at once vague, partial, and insufficient, 
was scarcely to be credited; and Le Clerc’s conduct, since his arrival, had 
been paradoxical throughout. He brought a force professedly to support the 
existing constitution of the island, and renew the relation between it and the 
mother country, which had been resigned by the incapacity of the latter; — 
yet, presenting a hostile force, insists on every post being surrendered to 
him, and desires the immediate submission of the General in Chief, whose 
conduct had never been questioned. He brings with him the beloved sons of 
the General, as an earnest of the good intentions of the French government 
towards him, but scarcely allows him time to embrace them, when they are 
torn from him and their distracted mother with the most torpid apathy. He 
says, he comes to restore “peace and abundance” in a country already peace- 
ful and abundant, by putting its inhabitants to the sword, and destroying its 
territory! The force he brought with him, when divided into the different 
detachments around the vast extent of coast, was insufficient, and the re- 
inforcements too trifling to effect any enterprize of importance, and without 
any provision being made till they had obtained it from the invaded country, 
inasmuch that the admiral was compelled to dispatch a frigate to Jamaica, to 
solicit aid of every description by the most artful finesse.” 


*In a letter to the English admiral commanding there, dated February 15. “The disposi- 
tion,” he says, “of the cabinet of St. James’s, and the known loyalty of your nation, Sir, per- 
mit me to hope that the ports of Jamaica will furnish us (should circumstances demand 


CHAPTER V 173 


Toussaint soon saw that, notwithstanding every deficiency, the mask which 
had been loosely worn, was entirely thrown aside, and that he had to con- 
fide in the pre-dispositions of his own forces, more than the sincerity or be- 
nevolence of the French. He therefore made preparation for a conflict, more 
terrible in proportion to its extent, than any he had yet sustained from the 
numerous enemies with whom he had had to cope. Considering the distant 
points as sufficiently provided, and expecting the great blow to be struck 
in the northern province, in which the French head-quarters were situated, 
he repaired thither with a select camp, to oppose himself to the Captain- 
General. His attention was still directed to every quarter, and his capacious 
mind revolved every object connected with his command. Expert as the 
whole of the black troops were, those surrounding the person of Toussaint 
were uncommonly so, being disciplined with inconceivable correctness. 

Though formed into regular divisions, the soldiers of the one were trained 
to the duties of the other, and all understood the management of artillery 
with the greatest accuracy. Their chief dexterity, however, was in the use of 
the bayonet. With that dreadful weapon, fixed on musquets of extraordinary 
length in their hands, neither cavalry nor artillery could subdue infantry, 
although of unequal proportion; but when they were attacked in their de- 
files, no power could overcome them. Infinitely more skilful than the Ma- 
roons of Jamaica in their cock-pits,* though not more favored by nature, they 
found means to place whole lines in ambush, continuing sometimes from one 
post to another, and sometimes stretching from their camps, in the form of 
a horse-shoe. With these lines artillery was not used, to prevent their being 
burthened, or the chance of loss; but the surrounding heights of every camp 
were well fortified, according to the experience and judgment of different 
European engineers, with ordnance of the best kind, in proper directions. 
The protection afforded by these out-works, encouraged the blacks to every 


it, and should you be abundantly supplied) with provision and ammunition. One of the 
ministers of his Britannic Majesty has said, that the peace just concluded was not an ordi- 
nary peace, but a sincere reconciliation of two of the greatest nations in the world. If it 
depends on me, Sir, this happy prognostic will certainly be verified, at least I am pleased 
to imagine, that our pacific communications will be worthy of two nations, to whom war 
has only multiplied the reciprocal reasons which they had to esteem each other; and to 
give you authentic proofs of our confidence, I lay before you a faithful statement of our 
forces in the ports of St. Domingo.” — Villaret’s Letter to Admiral Duckworth. [Le Moniteur, 2 
Germinal year X (March 23, 1802), 729. Sir John Thomas Duckworth (1747-1817) was one 
of the most successful British admirals during the Napoleonic Wars. He was commander- 
in-chief of the Jamaica station from 1801 to 1805. Duckworth captured Rochambeau at sea 
after the French general evacuated his forces from St. Domingo in 1803.] 
“See Dallas’s Hist. vol. ii. 


174 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


exertion of skill or courage; while the alertness constantly displayed embar- 
rassed the enemy, who, frequently irritated, or worn out with fatigue, flew 
in disorder to the attack, or retreated with difficulty. Sometimes a regular 
battle or skirmish ensued, to seduce the enemy to a confidence in their own 
superiority, when in a moment reinforcements arose from an ambush in the 
vicinity, and turned the fortune of the day. If black troops, in the pay of the 
enemy, were dispatched to reconnoitre when an ambush was probable, and 
were discovered, not a man returned, from the hatred which their perfidy 
had inspired; nor could an officer venture without the lines with impunity. 

With a body of tried grenadiers, and such troops as have been described, 
Toussaint waited the approach of the French with patient calmness at the 
camp of Breda; from whence he occasionally made rapid excursions to those 
points about which he was most anxious, on the north and north-west parts 
of the island. 

On the 17th of February, General Le Clerc commenced his campaign, by 
forcing a few villages, and forming some posts; and soon after removed his 
head-quarters to the village of Gros Morne, on the bank of the Three Rivers, 
about twenty miles south-west from the Cape. From the success he had ex- 
perienced in the compromises already made with the minor black generals, 
he had given his whole army directions to negotiate, wherever it could be 
done with safety, for the surrender of the different commands, and his suc- 
cess was greater than could possibly have been expected; it is, nevertheless, 
to be recollected, that every one viewed the present period as the commence- 
ment of a long war; and with those of inferior discrimination, the proclama- 
tions and verbal declarations of the French army presented the most grate- 
ful prospects; among which the officers regarded the confirmation of their 
power, independent of their black superiors, in the first degree. 

The whole of the troops landed in this province, having received orders to 
form a junction, the division under General Desfourneaux*”* advanced to 


the Limbé; another under General Hardy?” 


marched to the Grand Boucamp 
and the Mornets; and that commanded by General Rochambeau proceeded 
against La Tannerie, and the wood of LAnce. A small corps, composed of the 
garrisons of the Cape and Fort Dauphin, advanced against St. Luzanne, Le 
Fren, and Volliere. These divisions had, according to their own account, “to 
sustain several actions, rendered very painful by the situation of the ground, 
and by the movements of the blacks, who concealed themselves in the im- 
penetrable forests which bordered the valleys, and who had a secure retreat 
in the fastnesses.”?*8 They, however, obtained a transitory possession of the 
position which they had been ordered to occupy. 


On the 18th, the divisions of Desfourneaux, Hardy, and Rochambeau, en- 


CHAPTER V 175 


camped near Plaisance, at Dondon, and St. Raphael, where, after having 
halted some time, they advanced on the blacks with impetuosity. “It is,” ob- 


* € 


served Le Clerc in his dispatches,” “absolutely necessary to see the country, 
in order to be enabled to form a competent idea of the difficulties which it 
presented at every step. I have never seen in the Alps any obstacles equal to 
those with which it abounds.” 

On the 19th, Desfourneaux’s division took possession of Plaisance without 
resistance. That canton was commanded by a mulatto called Jean Pierre Du- 
mesnel, with whom the career of compromise commenced. He joined the 
French general, Desfourneaux, with two hundred cavalry, and three hundred 
infantry, and of course reversed the orders of Toussaint, and preserved the 
place. 

General Hardy’s division, before it arrived at Marmelade, made itself mas- 
ter of the Morne at Borspen by similar means, with the party which sur- 
rounded it. General Christophe being betrayed, evacuated the place with 
twelve hundred regular troops in good order. General Rochambeau took up 
his position at St. Michael, where he found little resistance, his right column 
carrying an entrenched post, Mare-a-la-Roche, defended by four hundred 
men and artillery, with the bayonet. 

The French General perceiving Toussaint’s design was to defend the can- 
ton of Ennery and the Gonaives, mustered as much force as he could towards 
that point. He detached General Debelle*”? with a division to Port Paix, and 
he had orders to attack General Maurepas**° near the Gonaives, who had two 
thousand regular troops, and two thousand cultivators under his command, 
in an entrenched post, within two leagues of Port Paix, and in the defiles of 
Les Trois Riviéres. He was very desirous to disperse that corps which had re- 
pulsed General Humbert, and ordered General Boudet to advance towards La 
Petite Riviére, for the purpose of cutting off the retreat off the enemy’s corps, 
on whose defeat near the Gonaives he placed great reliance. Toussaint, how- 
ever, prevented the execution of this movement by a skillful separation of one 
part of the force from the other. 

On the 2oth of February, General Debelle marched to attack General 
Maurepas, but a torrent of rain falling, prevented the columns arriving in 
time to flank the black division, and thereby turn their position. The columns 
which attacked them in front were so much exhausted by fatigue, that they 
were unable to carry it; and those destined to turn them being attacked in 


“Moniteur, — Dispatch of Le Clerc to the Minister of Marine, dated February 26. [Al- 
though it is likely that Rainsford obtained this quote from Le Moniteur, the particular issue 
could not be located. A translation of the dispatch appeared in Cobbett’s Weekly Political 
Register (April 24, 1802), 462-66. ] 


176 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


every point by the black forces, were compelled to retreat with difficulty and 
considerable loss. 

General Boudet’s division, in setting out from Port-au-Prince, marched 
against La Croix des Bouquets, which was set fire to by the blacks on his ap- 
proach; and General Dessalines,’ who commanded in that quarter, instead 
of retreating, made a feint by marching over the mountains, and there taking 
a rapid turn to Leogane, which he fired in the face of a frigate dispatched by 
the French admiral for its protection. These difficulties increased the offers 
and the deception of the French, and in consequence, a powerful black gen- 
eral, La Plume? submitted to General Boudet, with the whole of his district. 

On the 22d, the division of Desfourneaux advanced within two miles 
of Plaisance, then deserted by La Plume, notwithstanding the attempt of 
Christophe, with the force which remained, to resist it, in which they had 
a severe skirmish; he, however, cut off a part of their force, and retreated to 


Bayannai. The brigade of General Salm,” 


after performing a very fatiguing 
march on the 22d, continued during the whole of the night, and at day-break 
on the 23d, arrived at the position Christophe had left to join the grand black 
army, where they were rewarded by the remains of a considerable booty, it 
having been a depot of the blacks. 

On the 23d, Rochambeau’s division took a position at the head of the 
Ravine-a-Couleuvre, having the Coupe-au-Linde on his left, and the fast- 
nesses where Christophe was entrenched on the right. The divisions of Des- 
fourneaux and Hardy took a position before Ennery. 

On the 24th, Desfourneaux advancing, at the Coupe-a-Pintade met the 
enemy. It was supported by Desplanque’s division, and that of General 
Hardy. General Desfourneaux attacked a black out-post, which he pursued 
to Gonaives, and from thence to the River Ester. Salm’s brigade, belonging to 
Hardy’s division, took a position at Pateau, before La Coupe-a-Pintade. 

On the same day, Rochambeau’s division entered the Ravine-a-Couleuvre, 
where General Toussaint, with his guard, forming a corps of fifteen hundred 
grenadiers drawn from different demi-brigades, and about twelve hundred 
other chosen troops, with the addition of four hundred dragoons, waited to 
receive them in person. The Ravine-a-Couleuvre is extremely well protected, 
being flanked by lofty mountains covered with wood; in advantageous places 
were posted more than two thousand cultivators. They formed a consider- 
able number of abattis,*#* which obstructed the passage, and occupied the 
entrenched positions which commanded the Ravines. From the advantages 
of the defection, and a knowledge of the country, General Rochambeau exe- 
cuted his movement with a rapidity similar to that of the enemy he was en- 
countering, and attacked their entrenchments. A battle ensued, in which, Le 


CHAPTER V 177 


Clerc acknowledges, “man was opposed to man, and the troops of Toussaint 
fought well.” It was an affair deserving an accurate description in the mili- 
tary annals of the time. The ability and bravery of the French troops were 
called forth, and every manoeuvre of the black tactics was displayed. On a 
bloody field, at the close of the day, victory remained doubtful, and each party 
were more anxious with regard to their future movements, than the honor 
of superiority so dearly bought. Toussaint retired to the banks of La Petite 
Rivière, and Le Clerc to Gonaives. General Maurepas continued in consider- 
able power in the western province, and repelled the attacks of Generals De- 
belle and Boudet, until they were reinforced by two divisions, those of Des- 
fourneaux and Rochambeau, dispatched by the French General to support 
and collect their scattered forces. 

On the 27th, General Boudet was master of St. Marc, but Maurepas, by his 
positions, still retaining the command of the province, Le Clerc summoned 
all the force he could collect, and putting himself at their head, prepared to 
march against that general. He ordered General Hardy to advance to Gros 
Morne with five companies of grenadiers, and eight hundred men belonging 
to his division. To this corps he added a company of his own guards, consist- 
ing of two hundred men, and on the night of the 27th took a position at two 
miles distance. The divisions of Desfourneaux and Debelle were in motion to 
join, when the experiment of compromise presenting a more pleasing aspect 
than the doubtful issue of a battle, Maurepas submitted to General Debelle, 
on the conditions of the promise of General Le Clerc, to continue their rank 
to such officers as surrendered. 

These important points effected, leisure was obtained to consider the best 
means of attacking the Black General in Chief, against whom the great body 
of the French army could now be directed, with the addition of the black offi- 
cers who had been induced to join it with their troops. General Le Clerc, in 
consequence of these acquisitions, with the advantages which they gave him, 
and the consternation with which the inhabitants beheld the defection of 
their countrymen, began to view his situation with ease, and to indulge more 
extensive prospects. In this mood, for the first time during the campaign, he 
sat down to communicate with the Minister of Marine,**° and to beg the con- 
firmation of the First Consul of what he had done. It was a campaign which 
had already cost a profusion of blood and money, and which, nothing but the 
treachery of La Plume, Dumesnils, and Maurepas, with the powerful forces 
under their command, and in the favorable positions they occupied, could 
have been prolonged for an hour. General Le Clerc viewing affairs in another 
light, more congenial to his own wishes, considered himself at this moment, 
(though occupying but a few leagues of country with his whole army, and 


178 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


constantly in sight of the coast,) “master of the colony!” “The army of St. 
Domingo,” says he, “in the course of five days have routed the chief of their 
enemies, obtained possession of a considerable quantity of their baggage, and 
a portion of their artillery. Desertion is frequent in the rebel camp. Clervaux, 
La Plume, Maurepas, and many other black chiefs, and men of color, have 
submitted. The plantations of the south are entirely preserved, the whole of 
the Spanish part of the island has surrendered;”*?” when his army had not 
visited the French plantations of the south, his troops still remained inactive 
on the Spanish coast of the island, and Clervaux had only agreed, through the 
bishop of Yago, to surrender. 

Such was the progress of the French arms in St. Domingo, and such the 
opinion entertained by their general of the successes that had been obtained. 
The preceding account will be found corroborated by the dispatches of the 
Captain-General, in which he mentions the whole of the territory he had 
obtained, which was on the sea-coast, viz. Mancinello Bay, Le Limbé, Port 
Paix, Gonaives, St. Marc, Port-au-Prince, and Leogane. Notwithstanding the 
debarkations at nearly the same time at St. Domingo, Port-au-Prince, Cape 
François, and Fort Dauphin, and that the interior had never been attempted, 
they had not been able to form a junction till it was accomplished by the 
acquisition of the defectors from the black army, or to force Toussaint from 
their very centre. It has already been observed, that the maxim of the Black 
General in Chief, was to suffer them to harass themselves by forced marches, 
and to obtain positions untenable, or unavailing. More than this, it appears 
from their own accounts, they had not effected; while Toussaint and his 
forces changed their situation or position as often as they chose, never being 
overtaken in their retreat, or surprized on a march, but frequently falling on 
the enemy by an unexpected road, and routing them with the utmost dismay. 
A variety of these manoeuvres were continually practised, but the blacks not 
fighting for the panegyric of Europeans, they are unnoticed and forgotten, ex- 
cept by their countrymen, and those who suffered from them. 

The circumstance of three Generals high in esteem, with a considerable 
force, going over to the enemy, and joining their local knowledge and pecu- 
liar tactics against their own cause, within a few days from each other, and at 
a distance, is unprecedented, and must have operated with the Commander 
in Chief more than the shock of an unexpected and powerful army. In fact, 
such was the effect of gold and promises, of extension of command in the 
French army, that for a time Toussaint was uncertain, when he ordered a 
division to march, whether it was not about to join the enemy; while he was 
preparing against those with whom treaties had been formed previous to the 
invasion; others, on whom he most depended for the attack or repelling of 


CHAPTER V 179 


the enemy, and to whom their country looked with confidence, were turn- 
ing their swords against him. General La Plume, among the first to set the 
example of abetting the French, was one of whom Toussaint entertained the 
highest opinion, and entrusted with an extensive district. He seemed at a 
loss how to render his injuries sufficiently striking, and in consequence re- 
ceives the eulogium of Le Clerc. One of the first acts of this ungrateful man, 
was the exposure ofa letter, in which himself is mentioned with favour, and 
which was a principal cause, with his disobedience of Toussaint’s orders, of 
the violence of his praise. It was addressed to the commandant of the district 
of Jeremie, General Domage,*** and dated from the black head-quarters, at 
that time at St. Marc, for Toussaint’s communication was constantly kept up 
with every part of the island to which the French had obtained access. 


Feb. 9, 1802. 
“My DEAR GENERAL, 

“T send to you my aid-de-camp Chaney, who is the bearer of the present dis- 
patch, and who will communicate to you my sentiments. 

“The whites have resolved to destroy our liberty, and have therefore 
brought a force commensurate to their intentions. The Cape, after a proper 
resistance, has fallen into their hands, but the enemy found only a town and 
plain in ashes; the forts were blown up, and all was burnt. 

“The town of Port Republicain (Port-au-Prince) has been given up to them 
by the traitor, General of Brigade, Agé,**? as well as Fort Bizotton, which sur- 
rendered without an effort, in consequence of the cowardice and treachery 
of the Chief of Battalion, Bardet, an old officer of the south; but the General 
of Division, Dessalines, maintains at this moment a line at La Croix des Bou- 
quets, and all our other places are on the defensive. 

“As Jeremie is rendered very strong by its natural advantages, you will main- 
tain yourself in it, and defend yourself with the courage which I know you 
possess. Distrust the whites, —they will betray you if they can; their desire, 
evidently manifested, is the restoration of slavery. 

“I therefore give you a carte-blanche for your conduct. All which you shall 
do will be well done. Raise the cultivators in mass, and convince them of this 
truth, —that they must place no confidence in those artful agents who may 
have secretly received the proclamations of the white men from France, and 
would circulate them clandestinely, in order to seduce the friends of liberty. 

“I have ordered the General of Brigade, La Plume, to burn the town of 
Cayes, and every other town and plain in the district, should they be unable 
to resist the enemy’s force; thus all the troops in the different garrisons, and 
all the cultivators, will be enabled to reinforce you at Jeremie. You will enter- 
tain a perfect good understanding with General La Plume, in order to execute 


180 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


with ease what may be necessary. You will employ in the planting of provi- 
sions all the women occupied in cultivation. 

“Endeavour as much as possible to acquaint us with your situation. 

“I rely entirely upon you, and leave you completely at liberty, to perform 
every thing which may be requisite to free us from the horrid yoke with which 
we are threatened. 

“I wish you good health, 
(Signed) “TOUSSAINT LOUVERTURE. 

“A true copy, 

(Signed) “The General of Brigade commanding 
the Department of the South, 


“La PLUME.”34° 


Toussaint, confident in his resources, expected the completion of his 
wishes, by seeing his enemies, notwithstanding the aid they had received, ex- 
haust themselves. He knew also that the recreant heart which sold its honor, 
and every sentiment that should be cherished, for the fleeting promise of 
a sanguine enemy, would be easily regained when time should change the 
hands in which the power that tempted it was placed; and he had some rea- 
son to doubt, whether the defection of those who had abandoned him did not 
arise from other motives than those which were apparent. 

The public feeling in France, on receiving the distorted intelligence 
which the dispatches of Le Clerc conveyed, grew more and more against 
the blacks: — those who had been their most strenuous friends became their 
most active enemies; and, exclusive of the common prostitutions of the press, 
to which party gives birth on all occasions,” books were published at Paris, 
avowedly for the purpose of exposing the errors of Negrophilism, or the love of 
the blacks. In England it was similar, and the voice of discretion, or discrimi- 
nation, was drowned by the general clamour. 

Admiral Duckworth, after receiving the frigate La Cornelie, which was ex- 
pressly dispatched to him by Le Clerc, with every mark of respect, and loading 
her captain, Villemandrin, and his lieutenant with honors, wrote home for in- 
structions relative to supplying the French troops with stores and provisions, 
as without he could not comply with the request of the French commander. 
The Spanish governor at the Havannah exerted himself in every way for their 


*The meanness of traducing characters, and, indeed, all vitiations of truth, which are 
permitted, and considered expedient in the policy of states, is one of the most prominent 
errors in British legislation, and one which, for the honor of the country, and the credit of 
its consistency, it is wished were remedied. Its effects are of the worst kind, as relates to 
the government and the governed, the relations between both, and every other country 
with whom they hold a correspondence. 


CHAPTER V 181 


accommodation, by furnishing both money and clothing, of which the army 
was in great want. The following sentiments respecting the black army, as 
they form a correct delineation of the public opinion, are quoted from Admi- 
ral Duckworth’s letter, in answer to the French Commander in Chief: 

“It is with a painful sentiment I have learned the hostile reception of your 
excellency, and that direct violation of all the duties of colonies towards their 
mother country. I perfectly agree with you on the consequences of such con- 
duct, and I really think it interests all the powers of Europe. But, with a force 
so considerable as you have, the revolt cannot be of long duration; and the 
devastation committed by the rebels can only produce a temporary evil.?34" 

Having conveyed Madame Le Clerc by sea to Port-au-Prince, and estab- 
lished his head-quarters there, after making every arrangement in his power 
of his newly acquired force, the Captain-General re-commenced the cam- 
paign with fresh energy. Port-au-Prince was the most desirable residence 
they had yet obtained, not having been injured in the least, from the ease 
with which it was taken possession of by Boudet; but the next town in the 
south, Leogane, was destroyed by Dessalines, and every place that was likely 
to aid a passage to that quarter. Desfourneaux was left at Plaisance to protect 
the north, while Hardy, Rochambeau, Boudet, and Debelle, proceeded to the 
Spanish border of the western district. La Crete a Pierrot, a post rather ad- 
vantageously situated, between St. Marc and Port-au-Prince, which had been 
a depot of the blacks, and lately their apparent head-quarters, was the first 
object of the French; whereby they committed an error frequent in military 
tactics, where a necessary position is lost through the desire of booty. The 
Black General perceived this error, for, after appearing to guard anxiously a 
celebrated point, and finding means, first to convey away every thing desir- 
able, he then evacuated it, leaving to the self-nominated victorious army, an 
empty arsenal, empty coffers, and frequently unsheltered quarters.” — Such 
was the case with La Crete a Pierrot, and in the defence of which, and the 
operations that immediately followed, the blacks covered themselves with 
glory, and their enemies with infamy. 

The main body of the French army was put in motion against this fortress; 
and its defence, planned by the General in Chief, was committed to General 
Dessalines. Whether it was from the weakness of General Le Clerc, or the en- 
thusiasm of his troops at the expectation of booty at this siege, is unknown; 


“A General cannot be too much on his guard how he gratifies the best soldiers under 
his command in this way. To brave and exhausted troops, rest and comfort, when they can 
be afforded with safety, is a due consideration; but a desire of booty in a dangerous and 
doubtful warfare, is like sleep in the frigid zone, always tempting, yet frequently destruc- 
tive. 


182 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


but, if the vengeance of disappointed personal ambition, and an accumula- 
tion of every bad passion, had been infused in the breasts of the soldiers, it 
could not have been more cruelly displayed than in the affair of Crete a Pier- 
rot. The scythed car of the ancient Briton, or the poisoned javelin of the sav- 
age Indian, are instruments of humanity, compared with the fatal bayonet as 
used by the French on this day; nor, could the desperation of the blacks in 
their first struggle for emancipation, exceed their bitter vengeance, of which 
the very recital stains the page of history.*” 

In the beginning of March, the divisions of Hardy, Rochambeau, Boudet, 
and Debelle, marched against different posts in the vicinity of their grand 
object, with the hope of preventing the retreat of an enemy of whose reduc- 
tion they considered themselves certain. Rochambeau first attacked a village 
called Cahows, from whose few inoffensive inhabitants he met no opposi- 
tion; but General Hardy, with a considerable force, surrounded six hundred 
blacks in the Coupe de L'Inde, who bravely attempted to cut their way to 
Trianon, they were all taken, and murdered on the spot; and a Chief of Bat- 
talion, Henin, with a part of the same force, attacked the position Trianon, 
and carried it with the bayonet. Enraged by such unexampled warfare, Des- 
salines made a sortie from the fort, and advancing as far as La Petite Rivière, 
met General Debelle on his march to Verettes, whom, supposing a part of the 
cruel perpetrators, he drove before him to La Crete a Pierrot; but, so far from 
attempting a retaliation, he left them to the mercy of war, and retiring into 
the fort, discharged a volley of grape shot among them, by which Debelle and 
a considerable number were wounded. The commandant of artillery, Pam- 
bour, took the command of the division, and Debelle fell back into the rear. 

General Boudet now passed the Artibonite, for the purpose of blockading 
Crete a Pierrot, but had scarcely come within sight of the glacis, when he re- 
ceived a wound which compelled him to return, and his men were thrown 
into disorder. General Dugua advancing with a battalion of the 19th light 
troops, and the 74th regiment of the line, to form the blockade, was also 
dangerously wounded, and his party completely routed. To revenge this, Le 
Clerc, who had a narrow escape, a shot having hit the center of his sash, and 
carried part of it away, hastened a part of his artillery from Port-au-Prince, 
and Rochambeau spread fire and sword through every village in his way. Gen- 
eral Salines, likewise, with a large body, contrived to surround a small camp 
of the blacks, and put every man to the sword. 

On the 22d of March, Rochambeau attempted to erect a battery of seven 
pieces of heavy artillery on a rising ground, but in vain, the fire of a redoubt 
bearing upon him, swept away the whole of his men. He therefore marched 
to attack the redoubt, but found it so secured by a projection of logwood, that 
it was impossible to be carried. In the mean time, every thing being prepared 


CHAPTER V 183 


for evacuating the fort, Dessalines, with a part of his force, sallied forth in 
the night, and falling in with Desplanques, who commanded General Hardy’s 
advanced guard, a skirmish ensued, which, nevertheless, did not prevent his 
departure. The absence of Dessalines inspired the besiegers with new hopes, 
and for the three successive days they bombarded the fort with great activity, 
frequently setting fire to it. On the evening of the last day, the commander 
of the black forces remaining at La Crete, made a vigorous sally, and forced 
the French lines; a small part only accomplished this measure, and passed 
the Artibonité; the remainder were surrounded, and immediately put to the 
sword. 

Thus ended the siege and blockade, which had cost the French army much, 
by the loss of some of her best generals and finest troops, but in nothing so 
much as in the exercise of a ferocious spirit unknown among civilized people. 
Besides the cruelties in cold blood which have been recited, and which were 
exultingly acknowledged in the dispatches of General Le Clerc, were numer- 
ous acts of private barbarity, the recital of which could answer no good pur- 
pose, while the blacks, in this instance, are not charged, even by their ene- 
mies, with the commission of any of these enormities. Nor did they avail 
themselves on the present occasion of those advantages which remain to be 
found in the fastnesses of the mountains. The fortress which they occupied 
had been regularly built by the English during their possession of this part of 
the island, and the defence of it was truly English. The remembrance of this 
affair will long be found on the banks of the Artibonite, to the disgrace of the 
one party, and the praise of the other. 

Buoyed by what he conceived success, the Captain-General of the French 
extended his views, and prepared for the dominion to which he had always 
looked. He published an order in direct violation of his own proclamations, 
directing proprietors, or their attornies, to resume their ancient authority 
over the negroes.“ He treated with rigor and insolence, on the smallest dif- 
ference of opinion, the inhabitants who surrounded him, and with indignity 
the Americans who constantly traded to the coast, compelling them to sell 
their cargoes of flour, and other provisions, for bills on France, which was but 
the prelude to farther enormities. To prevent the circulation of facts, he estab- 
lished an official gazette at Port-au-Prince, whose bulletins solely were to 
be regarded. 

Toussaint L'Ouverture was employed in a care superior to that of contem- 


“Journal de Peltier, 1802, p- 531. [LAmbigu, ou Variétés littéraires et politiques was edited 
by Jean-Gabriel Peltier. Peltier (1760-1825) was an émigré journalist living in London. 
He gained some notoriety when Napoleon sued him for libel in English courts during the 
Peace of Amiens. He later became an agent in London for King Henry I of Haiti before 
they had a falling out. Chateaubriand discusses him in his Mémoires d’Outre-Tombe (1850). | 


184 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


plating his self-sufficiency. He had noticed the neglected situation in which 
the northern province was left, by withdrawing the whole of the French force 
to the recent siege, and he resolved to avail himself of it. Therefore, while 
General Le Clerc was revelling in the reputation of the French arms in the 
west, and dispatching General Rochambeau to sack Les Gonaives, which at 
one time had been the black head-quarters, Toussaint effected a junction 
with Christophe in the mountains, and poured down an accumulated force 
on the plain of the Cape. Reaching Plaisance by a mountain-road, he routed 
the forces of General Desfourneaux; passed on without molestation through 
Dondon and Marmelade, raising the cultivators in his way, and halted within 
a mile and a half of the city of Cape François. An universal consternation fol- 
lowed. Dispatches were sent, requiring the aid of the victorious generals, and 
Le Clerc himself left his infant honors, taking a hasty passage by sea to the 
Cape. From the concourse of people in and about the city, a dreadful conta- 
gion began to shew itself. General Boyer,*** endeavoured to oppose this aston- 
ishing chief, with his whole force, including the marines and sailors from the 
fleet, and was quickly driven back, under the very hospital; when the blacks 
laid the whole plain of the Cape in ruins, in defiance of the Captain-General, 
commanding in the town, and of Generals Hardy and Rochambeau, who ar- 
rived by forced marches, they then retired to the mountains of Hincha.* 
While these untoward circumstances were interrupting the felicity which 
General Le Clerc promised himself in his new quarters, another difficulty oc- 
curred where it was least expected. Among other objects destined for politi- 
cal use in the invasion of St. Domingo, was Rigaud, the mulatto-general, the 
ancient opponent of Toussaint, whose presence, it was suggested by some 
of his friends, might attach his former party to the French arms, but which 
Le Clerc considered an expedient too dangerous to risque. Rigaud, who ex- 
pected an immediate restoration of his property and command, finding him- 
self continued in concealment, at a distance from his native province, began 
to contemplate means of re-instating himself. No sooner, therefore, was the 
Captain-General called to the Cape, than he attempted a correspondence 
with General La Plume, on the subject of a visit to his friends, who immedi- 


“At the time these transactions were taking place, Bonaparte addressed the French 
people in a message to the Legislative Body, thus: “At St. Domingo great calamities have 
taken place, and great calamities are to be repaired; but the revolt is daily confined to 
narrower bounds. Toussaint, without fortresses, without money, without an army, is now 
no more than a robber wandering from desert to desert, with a few vagabonds like him- 
self, whom our intrepid clearers are in pursuit of, and who will be soon overtaken and 
destroyed.” Moniteur, May 7.—Such was the blindness with which this wonderful man 
had been influenced, and such is political consistency. — [Le Moniteur, 17 Floréal year X 
(May 7, 1802), 922.] 


CHAPTER V 185 


ately communicated his letter to Le Clerc. Enraged at what he conceived per- 
fidy at so critical a moment, he immediately ordered the unfortunate chief, 
with his family, to be sent on board a frigate, and conveyed to France, as one 
whose principles could not “contribute to the re-establishment of the colony 
of St. Domingo.” This was a circumstance, however, disagreeable to many 
powerful persons, and Le Clerc, with a facility which has marked the politi- 
cal transactions of Europe in the beginning of the nineteenth century, adds, 
that Rigaud had “sent emissaries into the south to stop cultivation, and alarm 


LES 


the peaceable citizens with terrors”" The officer whose duty it was to perform 
the present order, (Dugua,) had the sensibility to solicit Admiral Villaret to 
escort the wrecks of fallen greatness. 

The only means which remained to withstand the shock the French had 
sustained, were, an extension of the number and powers of the emissaries, 
who had been constantly kept in employment, to seduce the unconscious 
cultivators, and had proved successful in the districts to which they had ac- 
cess. Le Clerc saw his error in the premature attempt to re-establish the an- 
cient regimen by his order at Port-au-Prince, which had evidently inclined 
even the defective to return to the confidence of their brethren, and strength- 
ened in their determination those who held out, being at least three-fourths 


*Gazette du Port-au-Prince, — Letter of the Captain-General to General Dugua, Chief of 
the Staff at Port-au-Prince. The letter of Rigaud, also given in this journal, contains some 
pathetic appeals, which are interesting, as coming from the hand of fallen power: — 

“Persecuted” says he, “these ten years; driven away from my property for the last two 
years; taken prisoner by the English and other allies of my enemies, I have persevered in 
the same principles I had before. The French government doing justice to my conduct and 
fidelity, gave me an employment in the French army, and my first steps were bent towards 
the incendiary and murdering rebels of the northern part, whose example you were wise 
enough not to imitate. You are not ignorant of the deep wounds made on humanity, and 
destruction of my unhappy countrymen; I can only mourn their lot; the evil is irremedi- 
able; but for the sake of those who are yet living, for one who would not sink under the 
weight of misfortune, would you not think it conformable to justice, and even your duty, 
to give orders, without having recourse to superior authority, that every thing of which we 
have been deprived should be given up to us. I confine myself at present, to request you to 
cause my sister, or M. Deronseray, my attorney, to be put again into the possession of my 
cattle, and that of my brothers; our lands and houses, and their produce, from the time we 
have been deprived of it.” 
ok * X ok * * a x * * a 

“When the banditti are destroyed in the northern part, I will bend my course towards 
the south, where I was born, where I have lived, and commanded with glory! I hope to 
find there none but brothers and friends, &c. 

“A. RIGAUD.” 


* The nature of this request is explained by the order of Le Clerc (in the amplitude of 
his power) at Port- au-Prince, — that the ancient proprietors, or their attornies, should 
resume their estates. 


186 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


of the population of the island. To remedy this ill-judged action he adopted 
another, which, although too often countenanced in the complicated politics 
of magnificent states, was an instance of the most degrading meanness. This 
was a proclamation in which the freedom of the blacks is ASSURED, but that 
assurance is rendered a perfect nullity, by the arrangement of the sentence 
in which it is conveyed. As an example of the manner in which the French 
expedition against the blacks was conducted, the instrument is given in its 
formal state: — 


“LIBERTY. EQUALITY. 
“In the Name of the French Government, 
“A PROCLAMATION. 


“The General in Chief to the Inhabitants of St. Domingo: 


“CITIZENS, 

“The time is arrived when order will succeed that chaos which has been the 
natural consequence of the opposition made by the rebellious to the landing 
of the army at St. Domingo. 

“The rapid operations and progress of the army, and the necessity of pro- 
viding for its subsistence and establishment, have, hitherto, prevented my 
attending to the definitive organization of the colony. I could not have any 
fixed or certain ideas of a country with which I was totally unacquainted, and 
consequently could not, without mature deliberation, form an opinion of a 
people who have been, for ten years, a prey to revolutions. 

“The basis of the provisionary organization which I shall give to the 
colony, BUT WHICH SHALL NOT BE DEFINITIVE TILL APPROVED OF BY 
THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT, is Liberty and Equality to all the inhabitants of St. 
Domingo, without regard to colour. This organization comprises: 

“ist. The administration of justice. 

“and. The interior administration of the colony, combined with those mea- 
sures which its interior and exterior defence require. 

“3d. The imposition of duties, the means of raising them, and their applica- 
tion. 

“ath. The regulations and ordinances relative to agriculture. 

“sth. The regulations and ordinances relative to commerce. 

“6th. The administration of the national domains, the means of making 
them most beneficial to the state, so as to be less burthensome to agriculture 
and commerce. 

“As it is of infinite interest to you, Citizens, that every institution should, in 
an equal degree, protect agriculture and commerce, I have not determined 
upon this important work, without having first recourse to, and consulted 
with, the most distinguished and enlightened citizens of the colony. 


CHAPTER V 187 


“In consequence, I have given orders to the generals of the south and west 
divisions, to select for each of these departments seven citizens, proprietors 
and merchants, (without regard to colour,) who, with eight more, which I shall 
myself choose for the department of the North, are to assemble at the Cape 
in the course of the present month, to impart their observations to me on the 
plans I shall then submit to their consideration. 

“It is not a deliberative assembly I establish. I am sufficiently acquainted 
with the evils which meetings of this nature have brought upon the colony to 
have that idea. The citizens who are thus chosen being honest and enlight- 
ened men, to them will I communicate my views; they will make their obser- 
vations upon them, and will be able to impress on the minds of their fellow 
citizens the liberal ideas with which the government is animated. 

“Let those, then, who are thus to be called together, consider this appoint- 
ment as a flattering proof of my consideration for them. Let them consider 
that for want of their counsels and advice, I might pursue measures disas- 
trous to the colony, which would ultimately fall upon themselves. Let them 
consider this, and they will find no difficulty in leaving, for some time, their 
private avocations. 

“Done at the Head-quarters of the Cape, 5th Floreal, year 10 of the 
French Republic. 
(Signed) “The General in Chief, LE CLERC. 
A true copy, 
(Signed) “The Deputy Adjutant-General, D’Aousrt.”*° 


Never was so much art and weakness displayed at one time in any public 
officer as in this instance of Le Clerc, whose mind must have been capable 
of the most abject baseness, and reduced to the most contemptible alterna- 
tives." The proclamation, however, had its desired effect, and vast defections 
from the followers of Toussaint, even those in his last expedition, was the im- 
mediate consequence. 

In the beginning of April arrived the two squadrons long expected, from 
Havre and Flushing, and increased the puny advantages on which General 


“What a noble contrast is afforded to this effort of dirty chicane, by the conduct of Gen- 
eral Walpole in Jamaica, who, scorning an act that might appear to inveigle men who had 
held British troops at defiance, and entered into regular treaties, refused the honorary re- 
ward of his gallantry and benevolence from the country he had served, because he did not 
conceive his engagements with them perfectly fulfilled. See his Letter in the Appendix to 
Dallas’s History. [George Walpole (1758-1835) arrived in Jamaica in 1795 and commanded 
forces charged with suppressing an uprising among the Trelawney Town Maroons. He 
negotiated a treaty containing a secret clause guaranteeing that they could remain on the 
island if they would surrender. The governor ratified the treaty, but decided to have them 
transported to Nova Scotia because many did not surrender immediately. Walpole was 
furious with this decision, which he saw as a breach of faith with the Maroons. | 


188 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Le Clerc prided himself. If his conduct assumed the air of determination be- 
fore his late alarm, it had now no bounds, and with all the spirit of jacobinism 
which his brother-in-law had boasted to abolish, considered every measure 
expedient that would destroy his opponents, or confirm his power. If a body 
of suspicious negroes were discovered, an open grave awaited them, to the 
brink of which they were led unconscious, and either slaughtered, or pre- 
cipitated alive into the dreadful chasm, as suited the convenience of those to 
whom the charge was intrusted. If a person connected with the expedition, 
whose advice had been originally courted, began to discover un-philosophic 
views in the Captain-General, and to venture opinions upon the state of af- 
fairs, a vessel was ready in an adjacent port to convey away the disapproving 
object. The terror of the present regimen seemed to produce for the time a 
more powerful effect, than all the successes of the French arms, or the defec- 
tions of the black chiefs. 

Several bold pushes had been made by Toussaint, considering the dangers 
to which he was exposed, by the loss of his bravest commanders, and conse- 
quently their different plans of operation. Notwithstanding the success of his 
last expedition, his followers began to view forced marches with less patience 
than they were wont, and the situation of their opponents with proportionate 
envy. Toussaint continued resolute, with innumerable advantages, contem- 
plating nothing but the prosecution of the war; though arguments more pre- 
vailing had been introduced to the ear of Christophe, his relation, and Tous- 
saint was condemned to experience the pangs of Caesar, and exclaim, 


“Are you too turned against me?” **° 


Christophe perceived the consequences of the disaffection excited among 
the black troops, although its effects had been confined to, comparatively, a 
small part of the island. He observed the mental weakness of Le Clerc, and 
was thereby led to think his present proclamation sincere; it is not in the na- 
ture of a brave man to suspect the quibbling arts of inferior authority. He had 
been frequently tempted, as well as the other black generals, and at length 
corresponded on the subject of making peace, the terms of his compromise 
being, a general amnesty for his troops, and the preservation of his own rank, 
and that of all the other officers; and extending the same terms to his col- 
league Dessalines, and the General in Chief. Thus the situation of the blacks 
became no worse by the truce, should it extend no farther, while the artifices 
of the French would cease to have their effect. To such terms it was hard for 
the proud commandant to submit, and, it might have been perceived, they 
could not be permanent. But Le Clerc, who considered only his own aggran- 
dizement, thought a peace on any terms enabled him to claim the praise of 
restoring the colony to France; and with regard to the means, as he had prac- 


CHAPTER V 189 


tised a fraud in his proclamation in St. Domingo, so he could deceive the 
mother country, by his statement of the surrender. Thus, wading on through 
the same weakness, meanness, and infamy, the preliminaries were arranged 
with General Christophe, which afforded a temporary peace to this unhappy 
country. Public hostilities ceased about the ist of May. 

The arrangement completed with Christophe, the General in Chief was in- 
duced to commence a correspondence, which ended in a pacific invitation, 
and acceptance thereof, to Cape François. At his former capital he behaved 
with a dignity, and at the same time a gentleness, that won all hearts towards 
him, and obtained a general respect. With Le Clerc it was otherwise; —if the 
difficulties with Christophe were great, they were much more so with him 
who had governed the island through a long and arduous period, and Tous- 
saint returned to his camp without concluding a treaty; though he desired no 
more than what Christophe had obtained, with a dignified retirement—the 
wish of the greatest men of all countries and ages. 

The brave Dessalines alone remained without joining in the treaty of peace. 
He saw an unnatural amity projected, and he knew there were yet armies 
ready for the field, when called in defence of their freedom; yet he would not 
thwart the wish of his brethren, and therefore coincided in the acts of the 
General in Chief; as such he must be acquitted of suffering any imposition 
by the professions of the French general, for he believed none of them, and is 
not responsible for any sincerity, by his accordance with the peace, when he 
knew the blacks would not regard the dereliction of their leaders. 

Le Clerc did not long contend the matter with Toussaint,—a few skir- 
mishes took place, of slight importance, when the Captain-General, impa- 
tient for sovereignty, granted his wishes. “You, General, and your troops,” 
says he, “will be employed and treated like the rest of my army. With regard 
to yourself, you desire repose, and you deserve it; after a man has sustained 
for several years the government of St. Domingo, I apprehend he needs re- 
pose. I leave you at liberty to retire to which of your estates you please. I rely 
so much on the attachment you bear the colony of St. Domingo, as to believe 
you will employ what moments of leisure you may have, during your retreat, 
in communicating to me your ideas respecting the means proper to be taken, 
to cause agriculture and commerce again to flourish. As soon as a list and 
statement of the troops under General Dessalines are transmitted to me, I 
will communicate my instructions as to the positions they are to take” 

Toussaint, with his family, retired to a plantation of his own name, L’Ouver- 
ture, at Gonaives, on the western coast; the brave and faithful Dessalines con- 


“Gazette du Cap. [Said to be Haiti’s first newspaper. No copies have been located. ] 


190 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


tinued near them, at the town of St. Marc, with an intelligent and agreeable 
society. Never was a more interesting retreat, than that of these two great 
men, resigning honors, command, and the fascinations of absolute power, 
for the peace of their country. They were reverenced with increased affection 
by the people, and Europeans could not forbear viewing them with wonder. 
With the despicable jealousy of the Captain-General such an admiration was 
dangerous, and it did not escape his attention. 

To avoid the dreadful effects of the fever at the Cape, which now spread its 
ravages with uncommon violence, the Captain-General made an excursion 
to the little island of Tortuga, having previously dispatched his aid-du-camp 
to France, with an account of the surrender of the blacks. In this dispatch 
he describes them as begging their lives, and surrendering at discretion, as 
being hunted down, and made prisoners in their different residences, not- 
withstanding that his letter to Toussaint, in direct contradiction, was pub- 
lished in Paris at the same moment.” For the convenience of issuing his nu- 
merous contradictory edicts, he at this time established a Gazette, under the 
title of The Official Gazette of St. Domingo,**’ after their publication in which, 
they were to be equally in force, as if promulgated in the most formal man- 
ner. To this gazette, every account of military or government transactions was 
confined, those at Port Republicain and other places being restricted to com- 
mercial purposes. 

At Tortuga Le Clerc exercised the new power he had acquired with his 
usual want of discrimination, and what was scarcely credible, even from so 
weak a governor, he again violated the very proclamation which he had issued 
with so barefaced a quibble, without waiting for its effect or consequences, by 
directing the blacks who were on several plantations to be set compulsorily to 
work, under the dominion of their ancient masters. To Toussaint, (whom no 
compromise could deprive of the power of attending to the calls of humanity, 
in those who continued under his care,) several bodies made their appeal, 
and others respectfully acquainted him with their resolutions, not to suffer a 
violation of the rights which had cost them so dear. On this subject, therefore, 


348 at the Cape, on 


he addressed a letter to an official agent, named Fontaine, 
the 27th of May. 

“Tt is said,” he writes, “that General Le Clerc is in an ill state of health at Tor- 
tuga, of this you will inform me. If you see the General in Chief, be sure to tell 
him that the cultivators are no longer disposed to obey me, for the planters 
wish to set them to work at Hericourt, which they certainly ought not to do. 


“I have to ask you whether any one near the person of the General in Chief 


“See the Appendix. 


CHAPTER V 191 


can be gained to procure the release of D —, who would be very useful to me, 
from his influence at La Nouvelle, and elsewhere. 

“Acquaint Gengembre* that he should not quit the Borgne, where the cul- 
tivators must not be set to work.” 550 

Whether Fontaine courted the favor of Le Clerc, by communicating this 
letter immediately, or that it fell into his hands by means of that system of 
espionage in which his mean and suspicious mind delighted, is uncertain; or 
whether he had not predetermined the violation of his personal treaty with 
Toussaint as well as his guarantee of freedom to the blacks, which is most 
probable. Be this as it may, within a few days after the departure of this letter, 
and before the expiration of the first month of his retirement, in the dead of 
the night, the Creole frigate, escorted by the Hero, a 74 gun ship from Cape 
François, stood in close to the shore of Gonaives, when suddenly landing sev- 
eral boats with troops, they surrounded the tranquil dwelling of Toussaint, 
where his innocent family lay wrapped in sleep, unconscious of their await- 
ing fate. To Brunet, chief of brigade, and Ferrari, an aid-du-camp of Le Clerc, 
was confided this treacherous task, which they performed so as to deserve the 
commendations of their master.” They entered the chamber of the hero with 
a file of grenadiers, and demanded his immediate surrender. Great as he had 
always been, he was now surprized for the first time, by a band of authorised 
assassins, whom armies had never been able to perplex, Toussaint declared 
himself indifferent as to his own fate, but remonstrated with regard to his 
family. “I shall not resist the power you have obtained over me,’ said he, “but, 
my wife is feeble, and my children can do no harm. Suffer them, then, to re- 
main at home.”**? Reasoning of this kind suited neither their policy nor their 
minds, the guard was increased, and before the vicinage became alarmed, 
they were on board the vessel, and under sail. Two brave leaders, who were 
roused, instantly attacked the banditti, but their bravery was useless, they 
were soon seized, and afterwards shot.352 

As soon as Toussaint was sent away, the emissaries of the Captain-General, 
under the direction of Rochambeau, who commanded at St. Marc, set about 
discovering the connexions, and even acquaintance of the unfortunate gen- 
eral, as if to root the very remembrance of him from the colony: but that 
rested on a firmer basis, the justice and gratitude of the country, and was so 
deeply engraven on the hearts of its inhabitants, that it could only be expelled 
with their lives. The brave Dessalines was for the present politically spared, 
but above an hundred of those who contributed to form the enlightened so- 
ciety of Toussaint, or who were distinguished for knowledge or benevolence, 


*Gazette de St. Domingue. 


192 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


were seized and sent on board different vessels in the harbour, and were 
never more heard of; in all probability, as the same mode of execution was 
afterwards openly had recourse to, they were immediately slaughtered, or 
thrown into the sea. 

The astonishment which this flagrant act of the French government occa- 
sioned, was such as to paralyse the minds of the whole people. A dread calm 
succeeded. The Captain-General again boasted to the deluded Bonaparte of 
enormities which alone were sufficient to subject his government to the exe- 
cration of posterity. As if designed to hold up the transactions of this island 
to ridicule, the dispatches continued to display the most glaring falsehoods, 
and contradictory accounts; in the one alluded to he declares, that joy had 
been produced at the Cape by the departure of Toussaint. If that sentiment 
did obtain public declaration, when the town was a common pest-house, and 
the French army were hourly dwindling away, it was more probable to arise 
from the death of the sanguinary General Hardy, the second in command, 
who died on the 2d of June, universally detested for his total want of those 
qualities in which a true soldier delights. 

The dispatch, as relates to the circumstances it describes, is a document 
too striking and important to be omitted. It is as follows: — 


“Head-quarters at the Cape, June 11. 

“I informed you in one of my last dispatches of the pardon I had been in- 
duced to grant General Toussaint. This ambitious man, from the moment of 
his pardon, did not cease to plot in secret. Though he surrendered, it was be- 
cause Generals Christophe and Dessalines intimated to him, that they clearly 
saw he had deceived them, and that they were determined to continue the 
war no longer; so finding himself deserted by them, he endeavoured to form 
an insurrection among the working negroes, and to raise them in a mass. The 
accounts which I received from all quarters, and from General Dessalines 
himself, with respect to the line of conduct which he held since his sub- 
mission, left no room for doubt upon the subject. I intercepted letters which 
he had written to one Fontaine, who was agent at the Cape. These afforded 
an unanswerable proof that he was engaged in a conspiracy, and that he was 
anxious to regain his former influence in the colony. He waited only for the 
result of disease among the troops. 

“Under these circumstances it would be improper to give him time to 
mature his criminal designs. I ordered him to be apprehended, —a difficult 
task; but it succeeded from the excellent dispositions made by the General 
of Division Brunet, who was entrusted with its execution, and the zeal and 
ardour of Citizen Ferrari, a chief of squadron, and my aid-du-camp. 

“I have sent to France, with all his family, this so deeply perfidious man, 


CHAPTER V 193 


who, with so much hypocrisy, has done us so much mischief. The government 
will determine how it should dispose of him. 

“The apprehension of General Toussaint occasioned some disturbances. 
Two leaders of the insurgents are already in custody, and I have ordered them 
to be shot. About an hundred of his confidential partizans have been secured, 
some of whom are sent on board La Muiron frigate, which is under orders for 
the Mediterranean, and the rest are distributed among the different ships of 
the squadron. 

“I am daily occupied in settling the affairs of the colony, with the least pos- 
sible inconvenience, but the excessive heat, and the diseases which attack 
us, render it a task extremely painful. I am impatient for the approach of the 
month of September, when the season will restore us activity. 

“The departure of Toussaint has produced general joy at the Cape. 


“The commissary of justice, Mont Peson,” 


is dead. The colonial prefect, 
Benezech, is breathing his last. The adjutant-commandant, Dampier, is dead; 
he was a young officer of great promise. I have the honor to salute you, 


(Signed) “Le CLERC.” ’4 


Having rid himself of Toussaint, and assumed the title of General in Chief, 
in addition to that of Captain-General, with which he came to the island, Le 
Clerc affected to undertake the organization of a new government for the 
colony, a labour in which many great men had been unsuccessful. In doing 
this, however, he did not risque his character, as they had done, by specula- 
tive attempts in legislation, for he decreed the continuance of every estab- 
lishment as he found it in the hands of the exiled General, except as related 
to the customs, and even in these he admitted the regulations in favor of the 
English, which occasioned a strong remonstrance from the commercial inter- 
est at Paris. 

On the 22d of June the decree was published, “in the name of the General 
in Chief Captain-General.” Martial law continued in force, with certain modi- 
fications. Military commandants had the power over certain districts, with 
the assistance of the municipality; and each commune provided for the ex- 
pences of its government, while the whole held a general understanding with 
each other.* 

The object at this time requiring the most ardent and strict attention, was 
the health of the troops, which had suffered to such a degree, that in many 
instances where, (in consequence of their necessary dispersion throughout 
the colony,) small numbers were left at a post, sufficient scarcely remained 
to attend the sick and bury the dead, instead of performing military duty, 


“See the Appendix. 


194 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


while the rigorous service was necessarily obliged to be imposed upon the 
others, particularly in the south, and towards the Spanish division, where 
large parties of blacks, never brought into action, continued in arms, and ridi- 
culed the idea of submission. General Le Clerc preserved in his endeavours to 
infuse terror by the most absolute measures, and to implore the First Consul 
for reinforcements. Thus, if it could be considered as ended, concluded the 
first campaign of the army of St. Domingo. 

In the mean time, the injured Black General in Chief approached rapidly 
to the site of exile. During the voyage he was not permitted to see his family, 
and a guard was placed at the door of his cabin. On the 11th of June the ship 
arrived at Brest, and on the deck only this great man was permitted to take 
the last view of his innocent and respectable family. Their agonizing separa- 
tion will be long remembered by the seamen who witnessed it, notwithstand- 
ing the means taken to impress an unfavorable opinion of the blacks, and 
render them insensible to the emotions of humanity; nature broke through 
the boundaries which had been thus infernally created, and expressed their 
sense of the fraudulent delusion so strenuously, that it was conceived neces- 
sary to hurry off their august prisoner. He was conveyed in a close carriage, 
under a strong escort of cavalry, to the Castle of Joux in Normandy,” far from 
the knowledge of his fame or fate, with a single attendant, who was also con- 
fined and prevented from any other communication; and who, afterwards, 
weary of captivity, procured his own release under the pretence of betraying 
his master, and disclosing hidden treasures in his native island. From Joux he 
was removed to Besancon,** and treated as the worst of criminals. — He who 
had been the benefactor of white people in a country where their enormities 
had provoked hatred, whose power was never stained by malevolence, and 
who was greater in his fall, than his enemies in their assumed power, was 
kept in a damp and cheerless prison, without the comfort of a single friend, 
without trial or even examination; a proof of his exalted innocence, and a per- 
petual memorial of the political error of the Conqueror of Italy, which will 
throw a gloom over his apotheosis, and cast a slur on a government otherwise 
not destitute of virtues. 

The wife and family of Toussaint remained in strict charge at Brest for two 
months, from whence they were removed to Bayonne, in the same province 
with their unhappy relative, where they long continued unnoticed, and in 
ignorance of his fate.” 


“After a considerable period, a report gained credit that this hapless family had ob- 
tained permission to return to their native country: even miserable as the return under 
such circumstances must have been, the account is doubtful. [Indeed, Toussaint’s family 
remained in France. | 


CHAPTER V 195 


This prison may be considered the sepulture of Toussaint. France forgot 
awhile the habits of a civilized nation, to entomb one she should have graced 
with a public triumph; and England, instead of making a common cause to 
annihilate a nation of heroes, and depress the human intellect when rising 
to its level, should have guarded from violation the rights of humanity in its 
person. It has been the lot of him whose feeble hand attempts a tribute of 
gratitude, respect, and justice to his character, to regret the ill-requited life 
of the discoverer of the new world, and the unpropitious efforts of the en- 
lightened and benignant D’Ogeron, to view the untimely death of many brave 
and exalted characters in the fluctuation of events in the different attempts to 
obtain possession of an island whose fate is as conspicuous as the most cele- 
brated ancient state; but in no one instance does the mind linger with such 
keen sensations as on the unhappy fortune of the great, the good, the pious 
and benevolent Toussaint L'Ouverture.” 

Notwithstanding the disastrous state of the colony, General Le Clerc 
seemed unwilling to depreciate his government, by admitting that at the end 
of several months he had not accomplished what he had declared was effected 
in the first five days. The healthful season so much desired by him had long 
arrived, and the contagion had not otherwise decreased, than by the number 
of its victims, which every day grew less. He was himself scarcely convales- 
cent; the best officers of his staff had fallen, and those who arrived being un- 
acquainted with the country, and task to which they were condemned, sunk 
into despondency, and followed their predecessors to eternity! In the begin- 
ning of October, he commissioned an aid-du-camp to the Consular court for 
instructions and advice, and for once his dispatches wore the semblance of 
truth; they were in consequence carefully concealed from the public knowl- 
edge, but bad news finds its way through a thousand avenues, when the good 
is most anxiously sought for in vain. 


*The death of Toussaint is silently noticed in the Paris journals of April 27, 1803, and 
briefly alluded to in the London papers of the 2d of May following. In one of the most re- 
spectable of them is a paragraph nearly in these terms, whose briefness well characterizes 
an event which could only have been dwelt upon with shame: 

“Toussaint L’Ouverture is dead. He died, according to letters from Besançon, in prison, 
a few days ago. The fate of this man has been singularly unfortunate, and his treatment 
most cruel. He died, we believe, without a friend to close his eyes. We have never heard 
that his wife and children, though they were brought over from St. Domingo with him, 
have ever been permitted to see him during his imprisonment.” — Times, May 2, 1803. 

Suspicions have been hinted of this event being accelerated by poison. The author, how- 
ever, of an eloquent little popular work, states a circumstance from good authority, which 
would supersede the necessity for this means: “The floor of the dungeon,” (in which Tous- 
saint was confined,) he says, “was actually covered with water.’ — Bonaparte in the West 
Indies, &c. [James Stephen, Buonaparte in the West Indies (1803).] 


196 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


It was therefore soon known that Christophe had rejoined the black forces 
with Dessalines, who could never be considered as defected. They began, by 
affecting in their different characters of commandant of negroes in the north- 
ern district, and superintendant-general of negroes, to retreat from those who 
were hostile, taking care always to leave behind them considerable quantities 
of ammunition and stores. A number of new generals, likewise, had arisen in 
arms, from the interior of the island, who began to make excursions from the 
mountains. Among these was a powerful chief of negroes, of the Congo tribe, 


called Sans Souci,3>” 


who, after committing considerable depredations, could 
never be discovered. Charles Bellair,5* with his Amazonian wife, also made 
a powerful diversion for a while, till they were both taken, and died under 
the most inconceivable tortures. Clervaux, whose submission of the eastern 
part of the island had been formerly boasted without grounds, now declared 
openly his contumacy; and Maurepas, who had surrendered, was detected 
in a conspiracy, and put to death. Nor were the defections from the French 
army confined to the blacks, or to inferior officers among the whites; General 
Dugua, the chief of the French staff, disgusted with the horrors attendant on 
the war and more particularly, with the horrid punishment of Bellair and his 
wife, whom he had tried, was discovered in making arrangements to quit the 
French army, and took the resolution of destroying himself. 

The government at this period (if in the insubordinate state in which every 
thing appeared, any government could be considered to exist) assumed a 
complexion more sanguinary and terrible than can be conceived among civi- 
lized people, and formed a new aera in martial law. In attempting to disarm 
the black troops which had been incorporated with the French, the necessity 
whereof was discovered too late, the most barbarous methods were practised, 
ship-loads were collected, and suffocated in the holds. In one instance, six 
hundred being surrounded, and attempting a resistance, were massacred on 
the spot; and such slaughters daily took place in the vicinity of Cape François, 
that the air became tainted by the putrefaction of the bodies. At the same 
time the French troops being driven from the field, and obliged to fortify 
themselves in the chief towns, contagion spread every where, and the distress 
became dreadfully general. In their extremity, to aid and fill up the measure 
of their enormities, the use of blood-hounds was resorted to, that dreadful 
expedient, the temporary adoption of which in a neighbouring colony, had 
already excited the disgust of the powers of Europe.” 


“In this allusion to the circumstance of the introduction of blood-hounds to an English 
colony, the author has no other aim than to add his testimony (who was an eye witness) 
to the rectitude of the governor of Jamaica in regard to their use. Though a successful, yet 


CHAPTER V 197 


Fort Dauphin, Port Paix, and several other favourite establishments, were 
by the middle of October completely lost to the French; and it became known 
to the seamen who visited the Bight of Leogane, that after a considerable 
number of blacks had been hunted down in the neighbourhood of Port Re- 
publicain, they were hurried on board of the ships at anchor in the bay, and 
crowded into their holds; that under cover of the night this dishonored navy 
put to sea, and first either burning brimstone in the hold, or extinguishing 
sense by suffocation, or neither, the miserable cargoes were discharged into 
the sea in such quantities, that at length the tide (as if the mighty Arbiter of 
all, meant to hold their shame before them) brought the corpses into the bay, 
and rolled them on the very beach. Human nature recoils at the description, 
yet the scene is not ended, — under the dark concealment of night, the tender 
wife, the aged parent, and even the rougher comrade in arms, stealing by the 
watchful suspicion of their masters, were seen wandering on the sea-shore, 
to identify each victim as the wave produced him. 

Towards the end of October, an event occurred which, however expected, 
produced an extraordinary effect. The General in Chief, whose health had 
been long impaired, and who had tried every means for its restoration, sud- 
denly became worse, the air of the city had avowedly become mephitic, and 
Tortuga no longer remained as a retreat for him, being in full possession of 
the blacks. On the night of the 1st of November, after he had communicated 
his wishes as to the future government of the colony, died Victor Emanuel Le 


it was a dangerous experiment, and one which will, it is hoped, never be again tried by 
British soldiers; but with the control of such men as Lord Balcarras, and General Walpole, 
the rights of humanity can no more be violated than the highest point of military honor 
or discipline. The writer was witness to an anxiety with regard to any employment of the 
dogs in the noble governor, which must confer eternal honor on his feelings as a gentle- 
man and as a soldier, while the sentiments of General Walpole on the occasion are equally 
honourable. Strange as it may appear to those who had an opportunity of knowing the 
fact, the public mind (with a jealousy of national character most laudable and dignified) 
has never been satisfied that the Maroons were not really hunted down, and destroyed by 
blood-hounds; it is therefore most solemnly declared in this place, that no farther use was 
made of them than being marched in the rear of the army to inspire terror in the blacks, as 
has been mentioned in an account furnished to his respectable historian by Mr. Quarrel, 
although the writer is not certain that the care taken by Lord Balcarras to prevent it, was 
perfectly consonant to the inclinations of that gentleman. Some accidents, and perhaps 
more than those stated by Mr. Dallas, did occur, but they were never let loose, indiscrimi- 
nately, by a British general, for the inhuman purposes for which they are bred. [Alexander 
Lindsay, sixth Earl of Balcarres (1752-1825), was an army officer in the American Revolu- 
tionary War who served as governor of Jamaica from 1795 to 1801. He was responsible for 
the use of dogs during the Second Maroon War and the mass deportation of the Maroons 
to Nova Scotia.] 


198 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Clerc, having been only eleven months General in Chief and Captain-General 
of the colony of St. Domingo. 

On the morning of November 2, the following proclamation was issued by 
the principal municipal officer of the colony: 


“ARMY OF ST. DOMINGO. 
“The Colonial Prefect, to the Army, and the Inhabitants of St. Domingo: 


“CITIZENS, SOLDIERS 

“The night which has passed has been a mournful night for us. 

“The General in Chief, Le Clerc, your Captain-General, is no more. — He 
has fallen; an irresistible malady has borne him from you. 

“Having scarcely attained the meridian of life, he was already a conqueror 
in battle and vigorous in council, —at once a hero and a sage. 

“Possessing dignity without pride, generosity without ostentation; — his 
heart was just; — your sorrows and his were perpetually the same. 

“Soldiers, although the brother of Bonaparte is no more—he will live in 
your hearts. The brigands, whose terror he was, will rejoice in his death; — 
you will punish their detested joy. 

“The General of Division, Rochambeau, is about to succeed General Le 
Clerc. He has already delivered the South and West from the brigands who 
ravaged them. He is the choice of the government, and of the General whom 
you lament. 

“Under his standard you will continue to conquer, and your hearts alone 
can inform you what loss you have sustained. 

“Inhabitants of St. Domingo, rally with confidence around the new Chief 
who is given to you. — You have long known him, — you have often blessed the 
success of his arms. You will have to applaud new triumphs. Forget not, Sol- 
diers and Inhabitants, that union constitutes force; and that the only mode of 
honoring a man whom you loved, and who loved you, is to conduct yourselves 
as if he were still in the midst of you. 

“The French government watches over you: it will never abandon you. 

“The Colonial Prefect, D'AURE.” 35? 


This communication, had it been intended to appease the manes“f° of Le 
Clerc, could not have been more conformable to his ideas, or more replete 
with ostentation and falsehood. The body was immediately examined on ac- 
count of his disease, then embalmed, and placed on board the Swiftsure man 
of war; Madam Le Clerc, who had no inclination to remain on an island, 
where, instead of a promised paradise, she had suffered the most painful dep- 
rivations, went on board in a few days, Admiral Latouche, chief in command 
of the naval force in St. Domingo, undertaking to escort her home, accompa- 


5 ~ = 
hee Men A 7 cateiminatny the FL À Amy ta fonetis ly Vee trend 


ee mmt AA i h a inte Av aa Pommet Rem damda 


The Mode of exterminating the Black Army as practised by the French. 
Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, Special 
Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


200 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


nied by the Chief of Brigade, Netherwood, first aid-du-camp of the departed 
general. His sabre and hat were placed, with much formality, upon the bier 
on board, all the officers attending on the occasion. 

He appears to have been anxious, that the directions which he thought 
necessary for the future government of the island, should be put in force, 
and they were, as far as convenient with some persons, obeyed. As soon as 
the obsequies of the departed General were performed, it became necessary 
for some one to prepare for the repelling the blacks, who had advanced with 
vociferous joy to the very town of Cape François. General Rochambeau, who 
was appointed Chief in command, was at Port-au-Prince, and could not be 
expected to arrive in sufficient time, though General Watrin?’® had set out to 
succeed him in the west and south; General Clausel,**? commanding in the 
north, therefore, with the remains of a dispirited army, proceeded against 
them, but to little effect. 

A young general, of the name of Boyer,*©? who had commanded in the Gens 
dArmerie, having been appointed Chief of the Staff in the place of Dugua, 
was entrusted with the execution of every order, and in consequence thought 
it necessary to address to the French colonial minister some account of the 
transactions of the French army in St. Domingo from the period of the arrest 
of Toussaint L'Ouverture. In this dispatch, amidst a variety of matter, such 
as had been the custom to transmit to France, Boyer confesses the dreadful 
situation in which the colony then stood. Speaking of the first attempts after 
the departure of Toussaint, he says, “The heat became excessive, it was im- 
possible to make any movement; — the lowest mornes presented obstacles to 
us proportionate to the inconvenience of the season. The brigands increased 
in numbers. Our hospitals were crowded with sick, and disease daily made 


new ravages.” 364 


He then mentions insurrections at Marmalade, Dondon, 
and Moustique, when not only those posts, but the whole plain of the Cape, 
covered by the black forces, from whom, they might temporarily obtain pos- 
session of a small place which they afterwards were obliged to relinquish. 
He acknowledges the prosecution of the war against the leaders, which had 
been begun by Le Clerc, in the course of which Domage, the friend of Tous- 
saint, who had hitherto successfully repelled every attempt upon the south, 
fell into the hands of General Desbureaux. Loaded with the charge of an inti- 
mate connection with his exiled chief, it was not sufficient to send him “on 
board the squadron,” as the end of his co-patriots was termed; he was re- 
served for the extremity of torture that civilized barbarians could inflict. 


The arrival of the new Commander in Chief at head-quarters, effected little 


*Q. d. to be simply drowned. 


CHAPTER V 201 


change in the situation of affairs, though much was expected, from his su- 
perior knowledge of the Island, and character of the blacks; but this knowl- 
edge could not effect a change in the elements, or render a power daily weak- 
ening equal to that which acquired strength from a continuation of the war. 
He appeared anxious to direct it to points different from that to which it was 
ordinarily carried; accordingly an action of considerable violence took place 
on the parched plains of St. Nicholas Mole, in which the French appear to 
have made a feeble stand. They continued to fight during the night, and to 
precipitate each other into the sea. The end, however, was, as it must always 
be in a like situation, that any advantage the whites obtained was soon relin- 
quished. General Clausel was more successful before Fort Dauphin, which, 
after withstanding for some time the united attack by sea and land, surren- 
dered to him. Before this capture, Port Republicain and Les Cayes were the 
only towns, besides the capital, in the possession of the French. 

The first public act of Rochambeau, as Captain-General of the Island, was 
that of calling to account the young Chief of the Staff, who appears to have 


365 


been an éléve*® of Le Clerc, and raised to that dignity more from the Gen- 


eral’s fondness, than his ability. He was young and spirited, and the faults 
with which he was charged, appear to have arisen more from errors ascrib- 
able to that period of life, than from a decided cupidity. His suspension was 
announced by an arrété, thus: 


“ARRETE OF THE GENERAL IN CHIEF. 
December 8. 
“The General in Chief orders the deposition of the Chief of Brigade, Boyer, 
Ex-commander of the first legion of Gens d’Armerie. He shall be detained 
in prison at the Cape till his accompts are given in, when he shall be sent to 


France. 


(Signed) “RocHAMBEAU.” "66 


“This young General, with more good fortune than was ordinarily met with under the 
present regimen, was afterwards embarked for France, but war having recommenced, 
was taken, and brought to England. With the greatest impetuosity he inveighed against 
his treatment! —But when he found that he was to be deprived of a sum of money, the 
fruits, probably, of defalcation in his official career, he lost all patience. Notwithstanding 
every thing of personal property had been returned to him, as well as the other prisoners, 
he complained with great virulence to his government, “that the English had robbed him!” 
He was, notwithstanding, granted his liberty on parole at Tiverton, in Devonshire, where 
his conduct was frequently ludicrous in the extreme; and the letters he wrote to his gov- 
ernment occasioned many false constructions in the French papers. Notwithstanding this 
disagreeable circumstance, his favorable exterior, youth, and vivacity, obtained for him 
particular notice. On one occasion, the prisoners, having procured musical instruments, 
and formed a concert on a Sunday, the English peasantry conceiving it derogatory to their 


202 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Shortly after, the General in Chief renewed the decree of Le Clerc, so ob- 
noxious in France, permitting foreign importation into the colony, extending 
it to all descriptions of wares and merchandize, but increasing the duty upon 
them to twenty per cent;" with this arrêté ended the most eventful year ever 
experienced in St. Domingo. The French troops appeared to proceed with 
the season in which they landed,—to rise with the progress of the year, — 
and to fell, with their General, at the approach of winter. Before the month 
of December, not ten months after their arrival, near forty thousand French 
troops are supposed to have been sacrificed, and a considerable number, 
(though by no means proportionate,) of the blacks. Troops still continued to 
be sent from the ports of Havre and Cherbourg, but each reinforcement was 
less effective than the preceding, and the conscripts at length consisted only 
of raw youths, Poles, Piedmontese, and Flemings. Veteran soldiers considered 
the army of St. Domingo as the by-word of contempt, and the once popular 
cause of the subjugation of that splendid colony became no more heard of, or 
if mentioned, it was only with sorrow, or to be treated with derision. 

The commencement of the year 1803 was marked by a sullen cessation of 
arms, more dreadful than active war, as it gave place to secret cruelties, more 
extensive because less glaring. General Rochambeau was called, by the for- 
tune of war, to a command for which, notwithstanding the local and physical 
experience which has been allowed to him, he was by no means competent, 
and to which, no talents, perhaps, would have been adequate. In the outset 
of the expedition he had borne a subordinate rank, considering his stake as 
a proprietor, and it was only to the death of his superiors that he owed his 
present appointment. He evinced no desire to change the system (if so it 
could be called) on which the war proceeded, nor did he exhibit sufficient 
ability to produce an amendment. On the 4th of March, without any other 
communication of importance, the French colonial minister received from 
the new Captain-General an intimation, that on the arrival of four thousand 
more troops which were expected, offensive operations might be commenced. 

The blacks, on the contrary, during the whole of this awful cessation, were 
daily strengthened from every quarter, under Dessalines, who was unani- 
mously appointed General in Chief, who resolved vigorously to push the war 


religion, insisted on its suppression, and the Magistrates were obliged to interfere. With 
great gallantry the Frenchmen hoped that, though compelled to relinquish their music, 
the church of England would not deny them the pleasure of drinking a few bottles of ex- 
cellent wine, then in their possession, with the Magistrates: the latter declined; but were 
surprized at hearing nothing of Boyer all the time. — He was busily employed in a corner 
drawing a caricature of the whole party! 

“See the Appendix. 


CHAPTER V 203 


to a termination. With this view they collected a considerable force upon 
the plain of the Cape, which being observed by Rochambeau, he found it 
necessary to withdraw his troops from every other point, and both armies 
became unawares in a state of preparation for a general battle. This was not 
what either party designed; Dessalines, therefore, restrained his impetuous 
blacks, and the French forces were combined to strengthen Cape François. 
Several skirmishes having taken place in the vicinity of Acul, it was at length 
determined by Rochambeau to venture an action, for which he had many dis- 
positions in his favor. The troops selected on either side, for the affair were 
admirably posted on two neighbouring mornes,” the first movement was in- 
auspicious to the French, by the capture of a considerable body marching to 
strengthen one of the wings who were surrounded and driven into the black 
camp. Rochambeau began the attack with impetuosity, and the blacks for a 
short time gave way, but on his endeavouring to push the advantage, they re- 
pulsed him with loss, when the day closed. In penetrating the black line the 
French had secured a number of prisoners, and on them they determined to 
wreak the vengeance of which they were disappointed in the battle. Whether 
this determination arose from an idea that the part of the French wing which 
had been cut off were already absolutely sacrificed, or from the mistaken 
policy of extermination, cannot here be determined, but the unhappy vic- 
tims were, without the smallest consideration for their own men who were 
prisoners in the black camp, immediately put to death. As they were not care- 
fully exterminated, many were left in a mutilated state during the whole of 
the night, whose moans and shrieks were heard at a distance around the spot 
sufficiently loud to excite a sensation of horror throughout the country. The 
black commander, when acquainted with the case although the maxim of the 
benevolent Toussaint, not to retaliate, had been hitherto followed up, could 
no longer forbear; he instantly caused a number of gibbets to be formed, 
selected the officers whom he had taken, and supplying the deficiency with 
privates, had them tied up in every direction by break of day, in sight of the 
French camp, who dared not to interfere. The blacks then sallied down with 
the most astonishing vigor and regularity, raised the very camp, threw the 
whole line in disorder, and drove the French army close to the walls of Cape 
Francois. Such was the retaliation produced by this sanguinary measure; a 
retaliation, the justice of which, however it is lamented, cannot be called in 
question. 


“This French provincial term, which has become a cant phrase in the public conversa- 
tion on the war in St. Domingo, the writer conceives applies to heights divided by different 
mounts, separated by delightful vallies, with which the island abounds. 


204  HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


During the latter months, the fluctuating politics of Europe, which had 
never failed to produce some change to this unhappy island, again took a 
turn, and the peace, which was not inaptly termed in the British senate a 
“peace of experiment,” had been concluded. In the middle of the ensuing 
May, war was recommenced between Great Britain and France, when each 
power directing its attention to those objects of the enemy which were most 
vulnerable, the former rationally looked towards the force in St. Domingo? 

By the time the news arrived with the different commanders on the station, 
Rochambeau had permanently fixed his head-quarters at the Cape, and Des- 
salines had so completely lined the country about the city, that the French 
boundaries were confined to two miles around the Cape. As their power be- 
came weaker, an unnatural ferocity was increased, and apparently a desire 
to render the white complexion detestable throughout the Antilles; for no 
means, however extraneous, were left unattempted to annoy the enemy. Not 
content with the use of a considerable number of blood-hounds, (some of 
which they had procured from the Spanish part of the island, but most from 
that of Cuba,) which they sent in pursuit of small reconnoitring parties that 
occasionally ventured within their lines; when they were taken (the pen 
shrinks from the task of describing it) they were thrown to those animals, less 
brutal than their barbarous owners, to be devoured alive! All the arts, which 
invention worse than savage could devise in the people, who continued to in- 
spirit these animals with a ferocity not often known, was employed, to render 
them more terrific to the blacks, and more effective in the war. Such is the de- 
terioration of the human mind, under a pressure of circumstances. 

Dessalines, notwithstanding frequent losses, attended with the most hor- 
rid circumstances, sufficient in the relation to freeze the blood of the reader, 
continued the blockade, and found opportunities to decrease in the French 
the means of operation, both offensive and defensive. As soon as an Eng- 
lish squadron was perceived on the coast in July, he, in conjunction with 
Christophe, sent a flag of truce with a proposition to act in concert against the 
French, and, in case of agreement, to request some assistance of stores. — It 
is probable, that at the same time an account of the atrocities of the French 
accompanied this request, for shortly after a squadron, under the command 
of a Commodore,**® blockaded Cape François in the ensuing month, when 
Rochambeau began to sound the Commodore upon terms for a surrender of 
the French troops. About this time, so unsafe appeared the French interest, 
that Jerome Bonaparte, the brother of the First Consul, who had remained 
hitherto, (with what utility is not known,) left the island, and arrived at Balti- 
more, on the American continent, a young man more fond of fashionable dis- 


if? / , / , / j , ) 
= Neva wf “thew ty Mu Sti fh» Arin Y her the Civuclte VALLE 
/ 4 / 


/ 


on thew by Mie «bie ite 


Revenge taken by the Black Army for the Cruelties practised on them by the 
French. Reproduced with the permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, 
Special Collections Library, the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


206 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


369 of life than its ardu- 


tinction than of war, and more fitting for the agremens 
ous occupations.” 

The French affairs continued to depreciate, varying only by the increase of 
difficulty; attended with the same disgraceful employment of the most cruel 
actions, till Rochambeau actually relinquished every other merit or aim, than 
that of keeping possession of the city of the Cape, and fortifying it by every 
means that human art could devise or effect. In a dispatch on the 29th of 
October, he observes, “There is still some merit in defending a ravaged colony 
against a civil war on one side, and a foreign enemy on the other.”?”° 

Such was the situation to which were reduced the conductors of an ex- 
pedition, which had flattered the French people to the highest pitch, —had 
interested the powers of Europe, —and fed the vanity of every general whom 
interest could procure to be appointed to its service. —The victorious blacks, 
however, continuing to pour in reinforcements upon the plain of the Cape, 
Dessalines resolved to attack the city, and took measures accordingly. A 
powerful body descended from the Morne du Cap, and having passed the 
outer lines, and several of the blockhouses, a sharp conflict ensued, and they 
then prepared to take the city by storm in thirty-six hours. The blacks being 
irresistible; and before it would be too late, reasonably expecting that every 
one would be put to the sword, Rochambeau offered articles of capitulation, 
which, to the honor of the Black General, by foregoing the desire of revenge 
for the conduct of the French, he accepted, granting them ten days to evacu- 
ate the city, (and in so doing the island, leaving every thing in its existing con- 
dition,) in their own ships, with the honors of war, all their private property, 
and leaving their sick to the care of the blacks;t an instance of forbearance 
and magnanimity, of which there are not many examples in the annals of an- 
cient or modern history. 

Though the British squadron under Commodore Loring, which were still 
stationed off Cape François, did not enter into any definitive alliance in con- 
sequence of the application of the blacks, they continued to render their 
cause an incalculable service, by preventing the arrival of reinforcements or 
supplies of any kind. Having been informed of the mode by which provisions 
were obtained from the Spanish part of the island, through the Curacol pas- 
sage, leading to the eastern entrance of the harbour of Cape Francois, a frig- 


* Among other traits of character in this young man was, that he anxiously, and perhaps 
surreptitiously, obtained the London curricle of an English merchant on the island, which 
he used with an extravagant peculiarity in the city to which he had removed, while the ex- 
ecutors of its owner were instituting legal proceedings to recover its value. [A “curricle” is 
“a light two-wheeled carriage, usually drawn by two horses abreast” (OED ).] 

+See the Appendix. 


CHAPTER V 207 


ate was placed so as to intercept them, by which thirty small vessels, several 
laden with bullocks, were captured in a short time.” Thus, deprived of supply 
by sea, and shut from an intercourse with the land, General Rochambeau be- 
came reduced to the situation he so forcibly described on a subsequent occa- 
sion. “Pressed” said he, “almost to death by absolute famine, and after waiting 
for a considerable time, wretchedly appeasing the desperate calls of hunger 
by feeding on our horses, mules, asses, and even dogs, we had no way to es- 
cape the poignards of the enraged negroes, but by trusting our fate to the 
sea.’t 

The same day on which he had treated with General Dessalines, and after 
he had exchanged hostages, Rochambeau thought proper to send to the Eng- 
lish commodore a military and a naval officer, with proposals to treat for the 
evacuation of the Cape, with a dissimulation disgraceful to the meanest com- 
mander. These were General Boyé and Captain Barré. They proposed that 
General Rochambeau and his guards, comprizing about five hundred men, 
should be conveyed to France in two vessels, the Surveillant and Cerf, with- 
out being considered as prisoners of war. To this proposition, which nothing 
but the liberality they had so recently experienced could give rise, Commo- 
dore Loring returned his refusal, and at the same time sent Captain Moss, of 
the Desirée, with absolute terms. These were, —a general surrender, —that 
the French officers and troops in health should go to Jamaica, and the sick 
to France and America, security being given for the vessels which conveyed 
them, prohibiting at the same time the white inhabitants of the Cape from 
going to Jamaica. 

To this communication General Rochambeau returned the following 


answer: — 


“The General in Chief of the Army of St. Domingo 
to Commodore Loring, &c. &c. 
“SIR, 

“I have received the letter which you have done me the honor to address to 
me. As your propositions are inadmissible, I must beg of you to consider the 
preceding letter as not having been received. 

“I have the honor to be, &c. 
“D. ROCHAMBEAU. 371 


*London Gazette, Feb. 7, 1804. [Actually London Gazette, February 4, 1804, 162-63.] 

t“On which,” he scurrilously adds, “we were taken by the English pirates.” See Affidavit 
of Augustus Stenson, taken at Ashbourne, in Derbyshire, on the 27th of February, 1804, at which 
time Rochambeau was prisoner there on his parole of honor. 


= Whovil Mh wud Peet Oe of NL + Aumely #24 Me M, d'il 


Blood Hounds attacking a Black Family in the Woods. Reproduced with the 
permission of Rare Books and Manuscripts, Special Collections Library, 
the Pennsylvania State University Libraries. 


CHAPTER V 209 


The French general flattered himself with finding an opportunity to make 
his escape from the Cape, and consequently forbore any farther communica- 
tion with, and still concealing from the English the capitulation into which 
he had entered with Dessalines, but they were too vigilant for his purpose. 

On the 2nd of December, Captain Loring summoned the General of Bri- 
gade, Noailles,?”” who maintained unmolested a species of solitary command 
at the Mole, to surrender, who, while equivocating as to the mode of his ca- 
pitulation, embarked with his garrison in the night on board six vessels, five 
of which fell into the hands of the commander of the La Pique, the sixth es- 
caping, with General Noailles on board. 

Port-au-Prince having been evacuated at different periods, was under the 
command of the General of Division, Petion,*”? a black officer of experience 
and ability, who had been regularly educated at the Military School in France; 
St. Domingo thus became again in the full possession of the native army. The 
force which had arrived with the first body of troops, and stationed at the 
Spanish capital under General Kerversan, had remained without the power 
of interfering in the war, and contented itself with the parade of communi- 
cation between the French and Spanish inhabitants, and with the island of 
Cuba, between whom they found sufficient employment, in those petty po- 
litical intrigues that are always better avoided, as regard both the character 
and advantage of the countries using them. 

Immediately on the cessation of hostilities, which promised to be more 
permanent than any former one, the General in Chief, with the two Gen- 
erals between whom the jurisdiction of the island was become divided, 
Christophe and Clervaux, began to consider of the proclamation of indepen- 
dence, and those measures which were necessary for the public tranquil- 
lity. In a proclamation on November 29, by the three officers, from head- 
quarters, in the Name of the Black People and Men of Colour, they declared 
the “General Freedom,” and invited the return of those proprietors who fled 
during the conflict, without having become obnoxious by any cruelty of dis- 
position towards their servants, or inclination to the continuance of slavery; 
at the same time, avowing, that to those of a contrary temper, no protection 
would be promised; and that as to soldiery employed in any future expedi- 
tion, mercy was not to be expected. They declared their disapprobation of, 
and palliated the cruelties which were the unavoidable consequence of civil 
dissentions in all countries, and proposed that a new regimen, founded on 
the basis of justice, should prevail in St. Domingo.” In the execution of these 
propositions, and in preparations for the pacific state of the Island, to which 


“See the Appendix. 


210 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


they now looked, closed the year 1803. It will scarcely be believed, that to this 
gratifying occupation of restoring order, in the place ofdistraction, perpetual 
caution was rendered necessary, by some infatuated people who remained at 
the Cape, still devoted to the hope of replacing the old constitution, and the 
principle of slavery. 

Hearing no more from General Rochambeau, although acquainted, by Des- 
salines, with the capitulation, and perceiving no movement, the English com- 
modore addressed that general as the term had nearly expired, expressive of 
his hopes that no retraction would take place, and requesting pilots, to con- 
duct a part of the squadron into the harbour, to take possession of the ship- 
ping. He received the following answer: 


“LIBERTY OR DEATH! 
Head-Quarters, Nov. 27. 
“The Commander in Chief of the Native Army to Commodore 
Loring, &c. &c. 
“SIR, 

“I acknowledge the receipt of your letter, and you may be assured that my 
dispositions towards you, and against General Rochambeau, are invariable. I 
shall take possession of the Cape to-morrow morning, at the head of my army. 
It is a matter of great regret to me, that I cannot send you the pilots which you 
require. I presume that you will not have occasion for them, as I shall compel 
the French vessels to quit the road, and you will do with them, what you shall 
think proper. 

“I have the honor to be, &c. &c. 


“DESSALINES.” 574 


On the 30th, the Colours of the blacks were flying at the different forts, 
which induced Commodore Loring to send Captain Bligh®” to the Black Gen- 
eral, to enquire the circumstances which occasioned the change, when, on 
entering the harbour, he met Captain Barré, who entreated him to go on 
board the Surveillante, and enter into some capitulation with the French, 
that they might be placed under the protection of the English, the blacks 
having threatened to sink the vessels with red-hot shot, in consequence of the 
terms of the capitulation not being complied with in point of time. This he 
agreed to, and articles being drawn, in which the English continuing the lib- 
erality they had already experienced from the Blacks, agreed to their sailing 
out under French colours, and firing their broadsides previous to surrender; 
Captain Bligh went to acquaint the Black General with the capture, and to re- 
quest his desistance from firing, till a wind should be fair for their departure, 
which was then directly contrary; his acquiescence was obtained with much 
difficulty. 


CHAPTER V 211 


The force being taken possession of by Commodore Loring, comprizing 
eight thousand men, with the shipping, consisting of three frigates, and 
seventeen merchantmen, were conveyed to Jamaica, from whence Admiral 
Duckworth immediately dispatched General Rochambeau, and the officers 
particularly in his confidence, to England.* 

With the new year, a new name and a new constitution was given to St. 
Domingo. Desirous of obliterating every mark of its recent state, the chiefs 
who had effected its freedom determined upon resuming, with its pristine 
simplicity of government, its ancient name.’”° Aware of the failings of his too 
credulous countrymen, and knowing that nothing but the firmest consolida- 
tion of their whole force, could preserve the advantages they had gained, he 
appointed the first day of the year for a solemn pledge of hatred to the French 
government, and an abjuration of all ideas of conquest and aggrandizement. 
The terms of this declaration of union are dreadful, they were acceded to 
by the people with the enthusiasm he desired, and proclaimed throughout 
Hayti. 

“It is not enough,” says he, “to have expelled from your country the bar- 
barians who have for two ages stained it with blood. It is not enough to have 
curbed the factions which, succeeding one another by turns, sported with a 
phantom of liberty which France exposed to their eyes. It is become neces- 
sary by a last act of national authority, to ensure for ever the empire of liberty 
in the country which has given us birth?i 

The truth of this declaration soon became exemplified by the intrigues of 
some of the unhappy persons who still retained their property in the Island, 
and who, notwithstanding the effervescence of the public mind, which was 
apparent in every occurrence, could not desist from plans of aggrandizement 
and assumption of power; some, were so imprudent, as to retain the dogs 
which had created such a fatal hatred. Even experience was not sufficient 
to cause them to remain quiet, and those whom the strictest caution could 
hardly be expected to preserve from infuriated revenge, adopted the least. 
The blacks in their turn, indiscriminately perhaps, viewed in every French- 
man a tyrant; thus, mutually repulsive, amity could not be expected. 

One of the first civil acts of the black governor reflects considerable honor 
upon the consideration by which it must have been actuated. It arose from 


*The words of that officer are, “I send a vessel of war to England, with General Rocham- 
beau, and those officers who are said to have participated in his cruelties at the Cape.” — 
London Gazette, Feb. 7; Letter of Sir J. T. Duckworth. They arrived at Portsmouth on the 3d 
of February, and were afterwards sent on their parole into the interior. See the Appendix. 
[London Gazette, February 4, 1804, 164. Loring’s ship, the Bellerophon, would eventually 
carry Napoleon to St. Helena.] 

+See the Appendix. 


212 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


the following circumstances. In the early emigrations, different wealthy pro- 
prietors had taken with them for the purposes of pomp, a number of their 
domestic negroes; afterwards, when they ceased to receive remittances from 
their estates, and were unable to support a retinue, they abandoned them 
under various pretexts; others had voluntarily emigrated, during the sway of 
different factions, and thereby fallen into distress; while both were without 
the means of returning to their own country. The following proclamation was 
published, which, as it could have birth in no political view, but was a pure 
emanation of humanity, is an act worthy the imitation of older states. 


“LIBERTY OR DEATH! 
“GOVERNMENT OF HayTI 
“Head-Quarters, Jan. 14. 
“1st Year of the Independence of Hayti. 

“The Governor-General considering that a great number of Native Blacks, 
and Men of Colour, are suffering in the United States of America, for want of 
the means of returning, 

“Decrees, 

“That there shall be allowed to the Captains of American Vessels the sum of 
Forty Dollars for each Individual they may restore to this Country. He orders 
that this Decree shall be printed, published, and posted up, and that a copy 
thereof be immediately forwarded to the Congress of the United States. 

“By the Governor-General, 


“DESSALINES. 277 


During the period, in which he was occupied in these pleasing cares, his 
attention was called to others of a troublesome nature. A number of persons 
yet remaining in the different towns of the island, who had been the tools of 
every faction, and whose inclinations, and interests had always led them to 
foment discontent, and sow the seeds of rebellion. To root out these emis- 
saries was necessary to the public peace, and if the expulsion had gone no 
farther, without sanguinary measures, it would probably have been better 
for all parties. 

The official notice which then presented itself, was the publication of an ex- 
tract, drawn from the reports of the proceedings of the Government on that 
subject. It was as follows: 


“Extract from the Secret Deliberations of the Government 
of the Island of Hayti. 
“LIBERTY! INDEPENDENCE! OR DEATH! 
“The Governor-General considering that there still remains in the Island 
of Hayti, Individuals who have contributed, either by their guilty writings, 


CHAPTER V 213 


or by their sanguinary accusations, to the drowning, suffocating, assassinat- 
ing, hanging, and shooting, of more than sixty thousand of our brethren, 
under the inhuman government of Le Clerc and Rochambeau, considering 
that every man who has dishonored human nature, by prostituting himself 
with enthusiasm to the vile offices of informers and executioners, ought to 
be classed with assassins, and delivered up without remorse to the sword of 
justice, decrees as follows: — 

“1. Every Commandant of a Division shall cause to be arrested within their 
respective commands those persons who are, or shall be known to have taken 
an active part in the different massacres and assassinations ordered by Le 
Clerc or Rochambeau, &c. 

“2. Before proceeding to the arrest of an individual, (as it often happens 
that many are innocent, who, nevertheless, may be strongly suspected,) we 
order each Commander to make all necessary inquiries for, producing proofs, 
and above all, not to confound with true and faithful reports those denuncia- 
tions too frequently suggested by hatred or envy. 

“3. The names and surnames of persons executed, shall be inscribed and 
sent to the General in Chief, who will make them public. This measure is 
adopted in order to inform the Nations of the World, that although we grant 
an asylum and protection to those who act candidly and friendly towards us, 
nothing shall ever turn our vengeance from those murderers who have de- 
lighted to bathe themselves in the blood of the innocent children of Hayti. 

“4. Any Chief, who, in contempt of the orders, and unalterable will of the 
government, shall sacrifice to his ambition, to his hatred, or to any other pas- 
sion, any person whose guilt shall not have been previously well ascertained 
and proved, shall undergo the same punishment which he shall have thus in- 
flicted; and the property of every such unjust officer shall be confiscated, one 
half to the government, and the other half to the relations of the innocent vic- 
tim, if any there may be in the island at the time of his death. 

(Signed) “DESSALINES. 


“A true copy, B. AIME, Secretary. 


“Done at Head-quarters, Feb. 22.373 


To enable the General in Chief to prosecute with that vigor and decision, 
which the complection of the times required, the different functions of the 
legislature, it was determined by the deliberative meeting which had as- 
sembled throughout the month of April, to invest Dessalines with the Gov- 
ernment for life, which was accordingly done in the beginning of May, with 
the power of making peace and war, and nominating his successor. It is thus, 
that the advantageous principle of a monarchy, in an extensive population 


214 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


arises, self-evident, without the contending interests which afterwards sur- 
round it, and the factitious principles by which it is obscured. 

During this period, the French Government commissioned the Governor 
of Guadaloupe??? to treat as pirates all neutral vessels going to Hayti, which 
had been executed with a rigor as ridiculous as unjust. The division stationed 
in the city of St. Domingo, to whom reinforcements were reported would be 
sent, having never been called into action, except a few skirmishes on their 
debarkation, had suffered less than any other division on the island: the Span- 
iards, also, apparently glad of an opportunity for treachery, had supported 
and rendered them familiar to the country, nevertheless they were still con- 
fined to the Capital, without the power of advancing, or annoying the new 
Government, any other way than by their continuance in any shape upon the 
island. Kerversan, who commanded the division on the arrival of the expedi- 
tion, had long since fallen, and the present commander was Freron,**° a man 
of some talents, but little principle. 

Dissatisfied with the Spaniards for their treachery, desirous of removing 
the French, and impressed with the necessity of preparing for the worst, al- 
though nothing hostile was then apparent, Dessalines determined on pro- 
ceeding round the island, to examine every post or station, and observe the 
effect of the regulations he had established, many of which required to be en- 
forced. Ever vigilant, Dessalines was never known to make a false movement, 
or to be surprized” on his post, except by treachery, and of this he had now 
too much experience to suffer any flagrant imposition. 

Previous to his departure, however, it became necessary to address the 
people, to explain his intended journey, conciliate all parties, and render 
them firm in the support of his government, in proportion to his exertions in 
their behalf. The proclamation issued on this occasion (April 28) is a speci- 
men of this kind of composition, and is a positive refutation of those who, in 
opposition to reason and notoriety, describe the inhabitants of Hayti as being 
in a “savage state.” It burns with all the fire of martial oratory, while breathing 
that bewitching eloquence which entwines and captivates the heart.t 

On the 8th of May he dispersed throughout the Spanish part of the island 


*The writer cannot resist this opportunity of observing, that it were well if this prin- 
ciple of conduct were always equally acted on in regular armies. It is regretted, that some 
instances have occurred, in which any infliction under death is too mild a punishment. It 
should be the maxim of every soldier never to be surprized, and of a general never to admit 
of such a declaration. Though not sanguinary, he views the effects of such cases in so crimi- 
nal a light, that he could perform the office of executioner himself to an officer suffering 
such a circumstance. 

+See the Appendix. 


CHAPTER V 215 


a cautionary proclamation, advising them to desist from countenancing the 
French soldiery, and the vain hopes of opposing him which they manifested; 
and on the 14th he set out from Cape François, proceeding by the Mole, to 
Port Paix and Gonaives, where he halted for a little time at his favorite town 
and head-quarters. From this time, and during the months of June and July, 
he employed himself in examining the western and southern provinces, re- 
pairing the injuries of war, and settling the distractions of their government. 
“The Aurora of peace” (to use their own expressions) “now began to afford 
the glimpse ofa less stormy time,” **" and the community to wear a natural ap- 
pearance; notwithstanding the melancholy scenes of retributive devastation 
which occasionally unfolded themselves. 

An event was brought about during his stay, which, while it savours of ag- 
grandizement in the Chief, who had already been elevated to the highest 
place in the public confidence, served to combine the people more closely, 
and to present a more dignified character to their enemies. This was his ele- 
vation to the Imperial Dignity in a manner, and on terms not inferior to those 
which have raised other heroes, in times when heroism was the popular care. 

Whether the design originated from the similar event which had taken 
place in France, or had birth in the magnificent ideas which arise in a state 
bursting from the clouds of adversity into glory, is not determined; that it 
had an exalted basis is certain, and it was conducted in a manner comport- 
able with the simplicity of the earliest institutions, and the refined elegance 
of modern courts. 

General Dessalines having formally agreed to accept the dignity of Em- 
peror, a meeting of the constituted authorities took place on the 8th of Sep- 
tember at Port-au-Prince, to arrange the time and manner in which the will 
of the people should be executed; when that day was fixed upon for the coro- 
nation, and a Programa’ issued, of the different forms and ceremonies with 
which it should be attended. 

A procession was formed representing the different functions of the state, 
depicted so as to shew how they affected its interest, thereby producing a 
grand and impressive picture, highly descriptive of the manners and prin- 
ciples of the people. In this procession, Education took the lead, as the first 
and most prominent local good; the Arts next, as little inferior; and Agricul- 
ture the third, as partaking of the first class, and at the head of the second; 
Foreign and National Commerce succeeded; then Justice and Legislation; 
followed by the Officers of Health; and last of all the Military. 

A superb amphitheatre was erected on a martial plain; when Jean Jaques 


“See the Appendix. 


216 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


Dessalines was declared Emperor of Hayti, amid the thunder of cannon, 
which was re-echoed as an acknowledgement by the Marine of other nations, 
in the harbour. The Church sanctified the event by a solemn Te Deum, and 
the day concluded by public rejoicings, apparently the most sincere that ever 


greeted a similar occasion. 


CHAP. VI. 
On the Establishment of a Black Empire, and the 
probable Effects of this Colonial Revolution. 


sUCH, then, with the close of the year 1804, was the end of this eventful 
revolution, in which the Imperial dignity was the reward for the courage and 
experience of the Chief, who, profiting by the misfortunes of his brave and 
good predecessor, had more successfully combated his enemies, — those ene- 
mies who were weak enough to consider it possible, nay, easy to reduce to 
slavery a powerful body of men who had for some few years enjoyed a state 
of the most perfect freedom; nor can it be asserted that his title is in any way 
inferior to that of the extraordinary man whose laurels have been sullied in 
the attempt to subdue him. 

The recurrence to the earliest state of the new world for the name and 
character of the government, with the advantage of more than three hundred 
years experience, is an idea which could not originate in mean or untutored 
minds; nor is such the character of any of the present rulers of Hayti. With 
respect to the future policy they may chuse to adopt, time alone can deter- 
mine. Should they adhere to the basis on which they have founded their pro- 
ceedings, and remain unmolested by European powers, they may arrive at the 
most enviable state of grandeur and felicity; but should any evil spirits obtain 
a footing amongst them, and interrupt the harmony which may otherwise be 
maintained, by occasioning factions to arise from old contentions, or new 
divisions, the frequent consequence of overgrown wealth or dominion, they 
will in all probability fulfil the prediction of Edwards, by becoming “savages 
in the midst of society, without peace, security, agriculture, or property.’ °°? 

But, in either case, their reduction to their former situation is impossible; 
and though Europe waste her armies, and exhaust her navies in the endeav- 
our, the blacks of St. Domingo will be unsubdued; and if they cannot repel 
the invasion ofa reiterated and extended force, they will cut them off, as hath 
been already observed, with a scythe more keen and rapid than that of time. 


CHAPTER VI 217 


Every year and every day has been, and will still continue, to be pregnant with 
experience to them, and no power on earth will be able to reduce them, while 
their population will continue to increase in a vast proportion. The writer has 
reiterated these sentiments for several years, and through a period in which 
their confirmation appeared more than doubtful; his opinions were disinter- 
ested, and unmingled with any prejudice, either local, political, or pecuniary, 
and every event has tended to strengthen them. 

Should it ever happen in the course of time, that any of the various means 
dispensed by providence to check the exuberance of population should fall 
on Hayti, either in the form of contagion, or by a multiplication of the various 
diseases, to which the African race are subject, in the degeneration of slavery; 
and that a white population should by that time be formed, capable of taking 
advantage of such a calamity; then, but not till then, should the neighbouring 
continent of America be in a state to colonize, or the policy of European gov- 
ernments desire the attainment of the most splendid colony of the Antilles, 
an opportunity might possibly be afforded. —Whether it would be rational 
on the score of justice, or humanity to do so, is a subject not to be argued at 
present. Those who undertake the project, if ever it should be undertaken, 
will be capable of defending it with plausibility. 

But to this part of the subject the public attention is rarely directed; the 
danger of a community of manumitted slaves in the American Archipelago, 
is their chief objection to the new Empire of Hayti. With those who form 
their opinion on erroneous principles, fears of this kind may arise, as the 
unreflecting clown startles at his shadow on the moonlight sward. Whether 
Hayti exist or not, as an independent island, if the black population of the 
other colonies of the Antilles continue to increase as it has done during the 
last fifty years, and to overbalance that of the whites, no power but that of 
the exercise of humanity, can preserve them to their present possessors. The 
practise of this power, happily, is prevalent at present, and it is hoped, and 
expected, that profiting by the past, it will be always co-equal with the in- 
creased wealth of the proprietors, and their capability of being liberal; but if 
it does not originate with themselves, that the smallest danger can arise to the 
colonies, from the Empire of Hayti, may be positively denied. The negroes, 
though sufficiently warlike and vindictive, when roused by revenge, court 
quiet, and are ardent in all the relations of life, when kindly treated by superi- 
ors. They would then with extreme difficulty, if at all, be persuaded to quit a 
situation of comparative ease, to join strangers in a bloody conflict. Besides, 
the inhabitants of Hayti could derive no advantage from such a union. They 
are not to be compared with the Maroons, or the Charaibs, as they possess 
a territory with an organised government, and sufficient resources of their 


218 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE BLACK EMPIRE OF HAYTI 


own, all which they must lose in proportion to the success of any project of 
ambition. Neither have they, nor do they want the maritime power so abso- 
lutely necessary for an attack on the other islands; and many other difficulties 
occur to prevent such a scheme. 

Yet, as many events beyond the utmost stretch of foresight happen in the 
course of time, it is incumbent upon those in particular, whose local interest 
is concerned, to take due care to prevent the miseries which they appear pre- 
maturely to dread; for extra precaution is not so great an evil, as a deficiency 
of necessary care; to the Proprietors of the British colonies in particular it is 
recommended, to think an inducement to some degree of devotion among 
their slaves an object of importance, with a careful diffusion of morality. In 
the former, the more peculiar mysteries need not be included, nor in the 
latter that rigid system, which denies even the innocent gaieties of humble 
life. The personal care, too, of negroes, should be an object of more attention, 
than it is on certain occasions, with a view to preserve that health which is 
of so much value to their proprietors, as well as the comfort, necessary to 
render them satisfied with their condition. These attentions, including the 
care of pregnant females, added to those humane and salutary laws?*? which 
already preclude excessive punishment, or labour, will always produce the 
most desirable effects, and be more certain than all the inflictions, that coer- 
cive measures can devise to prevent a spirit of deliberation (the first revolu- 
tionary system) among slaves. 

And finally, if, it should appear from the concessions, which are already 
granted that the slaves in the colonies may be elevated from the consider- 
ation of being a species below, even to the lowest class of human society, the 
complaints which have formerly arisen, will soon have no grounds for exis- 
tence; and those philanthropic minds which have been led, from the glorious 
principle of protecting “him that had none to help him,’*** to countenance 
an enthusiasm, which has been of the most fatal tendency, will, no doubt, 
exert their beneficent offices in increasing the good effects, of what may have 
been already done. But this principle must always be preserved inviolable, 
(whether it militate or not against the policy of retaining distant colonies will 
not be argued,)—that no deliberative body should prescribe for the internal 
polity of a country at a distance, such as precludes an intimate and constant 
knowledge of its concerns. 

The Enquiry into the Rise of the Black Empire of Hayti, thus concludes for 
the present. It is hoped a remarkable and correct picture will be found of a 
Revolution, which ranks among the most remarkable and important trans- 
actions of the day. It is, at least, untinctured with prejudice of any kind, unless 
that spirit can be so called, which inclines towards truth and humanity. 

